Federal Law Gazette N 565/1978, amendment n 370/1986

ARTICLE 1
Sec. 1.
(Constitutional Provision)
Fundamental Right to Data Protection

(1) Everyone shall have the right that his personal

data are.kept secret insofar as he has an interest in such data
that needs protection, in' particular as regards the respect of
his privacy and family life.

(2) Any limitations of .the right granted in p. 1 shall be
permitted only for the safeguarding of justified interests of a
third party or on the basis of laws necessary for the reasons
stated in Art. 8, p. 2 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (Federal Law Gazette/BGBl. No. 210/1958). Even in the
case of such limitations priority shall be given to the confidentiality of the personal data.

(3) Everyone shall, within the limits of legal provisions,
have the right to information as to who is collecting or processing his personal data, their sources, their nature and
content and their utilization, insofar as his data are subject
to automated processing.

(4) Everyone shall, within the limits of legal provisions,
have the right to rectification of incorrect data and to
deletion cf illegally collected or processed data, insofar as
his data are subject to automated processing.

(5) Limitations of the rights stated in p. 3 and 4 shall be
permitted only under the conditions stated in p. 2.

(6) Insofar as persons or entities act under private law,
the fundamental right to data protection shall be asserted by
recourse to the ordinary courts.

Legislative Competence and Enforcement
Sec. 2. (1) The Federation shall have the legislation on'the
protection of personal data in automated data traffic.
(2)The Federation shall have power to execute such Federal
laws. Insofar as such data are collected, processed or
communicated by a Land, on behalf of a Land, by or on behalf of
legal persons established by law within the competence of the
Lander these Federal laws shall be executed by the Lander
unless the execution has been entrusted by Federal law to the .
Data Protection Commission, the Data Protection Council or the
courts.

ARTICLE 2
PART 1

General Provisions
Sec. 3. For the following provisions of the Act the terms
listed below are defined as follows:

1. Data: information s tored on a data medium concerning an
identified or with great probability identifiable subject
(personal data);
2. Data Subject: any natural or legal person or association
different from the data controller (p. 3), whose data are
applied (p. 12); legal persons of public law and their
organs shall not be considered to be data subjects insofar
as they exercise official functions;
3. Data Controller: any person or organ of a legal person of
public law, who processes or by consulting "a data processor
(p.4) gets data processed by automated means;
4. Service Processor: any person or organ of a legal person of
public law, who uses data on the basis of such a mandate of
a data controller, which especially aimes at automated
processing of data;
5. EDP: the course of steps of processing (p. 7), which are
organized in order to reach a defined result (purpose) and
which - as a whole or partly - are performed automated (i_.e.
using machines and controlled by programs), if personal data
can be selected out of all data stored according to at least
one characteristic on the basis of the actually used
machinery and programs;
6. Collection of Data: the gathering or other acquisition of
data for EDP;
7. Processing of Data: the recording, storing, comparing,
modification, interlinkeage, reproduction, communication or
deletion of data within EDP;
8. Use of Data: any kind of handling of data performed by a
data controller or a data processor, which is not
collection, processing or transmission;
9. Transmission of Data: the transfer of processed data to a
recipient other than the data subject, the data controller
or the data processor, in particular the publication of such
data as well as their use for other purposes;
10. Committing of Data: the transfer of data from a data
controller to a data processor or from one data processor
to another;
11. Deletion of Data: a) the obliteration of data in such a way that no reconstruction is possible (physical deletion);
b) the blocking of access to data by adequate means of programming (logical deletion);
12. Data Traffic (Application of Data): collection, processing,
use, transmission and committing of data or one of these operations.

Sec. 4. (1) The provisions of Part 2 shall apply to data
traffic of or on behalf of legal subjects established by law
other than legal subjects under Sec. 5. below.

(2) By order of the Federal Government legal subjects as
defined in p. 1 may - after consultation of the Data Protection
Council - as far as it is necessary in view of their activities
under private law and if this is no danger to interests of data
subjects that need protection, be exempted from the application
of Part 2. Such orders shall be subject to the approval of the
Main Committee of the National Council. For such legal subjects
Part 3 shall apply.
(3) Secs. 8., 9., 11. und 12 shall not apply to the
processing of data insofar as such processing is necessary:
1. for the protection of constitutional institutions of the
Republic of Austria as well as for purposes of the
administration of penal law, o:c
2. for the safeguarding of the military preparedness of the
Federal Army, or
3. for comprehensive national defense. This exemption shall be
subject to an order of the Federal Government after
consultation of tne Data Protection Council and in agreement with the Main Committee of the Nationalrat. The order shall
lay down in detail all exemptions such as the kind of data,
processing elements, etc. 

Sec. 5. 
(1) The provisions of Part 2 shall apply to the .
processing of data by or on behalf of the Lander, by or on
behalf of legal persons established by law within the
competence of the Lander as well as by or on behalf of
Gemeinden or associations of them, subject to the provision
that the data’protection order (Sec. 9.) as well as the amount
of cost compensation for information (Sec. 11 p 4) shall be
laid down by the Land Government.

(2) Legal subjects as defined in p.

(1) may as far as it is necessary in view of their activities under private law and if
this is no danger to interests of data subjects that need
protection, be exempted from the application of Part 2 by order
of the Land Government after consultation of the Data
Protection Council. For such legal subjects Part 3 shall apply.

PART 2
Public sector
Permissibility of collection and processing

Sec. 6. Data may be collected and processed for purposes of
automated catu processing only if such is expressly authorized
by law, or an essential prerequisite to enable the data
controller to fulfil the tasks etrusted to him by law.

Permissibility of transmission
Sec. 7.

(1) Processed data may be transmitted only if

1. such is expressly authorized by law, or

2. the data subject has expressly and in'writing agreed to the
transmission, which consent may be revoked in writing or

3. data are transmitted exclusively for statistical purposes to
the Austrian Central Office; of Statistics and are proceddes
there after having been rendered anonymous.

(2) Transmission of data to organs of the Lander and Gemeinde governments including public corporations shall
further be permissible if the data are an essential prerequisite to enable the recipient to fulfil the tasks
entrusted to him by law.

(3) Data may be transmitted to other recipients than
mentioned in p. 2 only, if it is necessary for the safeguarding
of justified interests of a third party, which prevail the interest of.the data subject that his personal data are kept
secret. In case of doubt priority shall be given to the confidentiality of the personal data.

(4) Transmissions which are not registered have to be
protocolled in such a way, that the data subject can be given
information according to sec. 11. Transmissions as defined in
sec. 8 p. 3 do not need to be protocolled.

Notification of data processing and transmission
Sec. 8. (1) Every data controller shall at the beginning of
data processing submit a notification to the Data Processing
Register (sec. 47).
(2) This notification shall contain the name, the address
and the registration number of the data controller - if it has
already been attributed - , the purpose of the notified processing, its legal basis, the groups of data subjects
affected by the processing as well as the classes of their data. Transmissions of data shall be notified according to
sec. 23 p. 2, numbers 2 and 5.

(3) Types of data processing and transmissions, which are
performed by a great number of data controllers and the
contents of which are defined by law or by 'a contract with the
data subject, may be exempted from mandatory notification by an
Order of the Federal Chancellor, which may be passed according
to the detailed provisions of sec 23 p: 4 after consultation of
the Data Protection Council. If such data processing is made,
only the name, the address and the registration number of data
controller - if it has already been attributed - as well as the
denomination of the standard type of data processing shall be
notified.

(4) Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall apply mutatis mutandis to
changes of notified facts.

(5) The data controller shall use the registration number,
which is attributed to him in case of registration whenever he
tranmits data and gives informations to the data subject.

Registration
Sec. 8a. (1) If a notification is incomplete in the sense of the Data Processing Register may within two months
instruct the data controller to complete it within an adequate
prescribed period of time.
(2) A notification is incomplete, if elements are missing,
incorrect, inconsistent or so insufficient, that people looking
into the register will - when exercising their rights on the
basis of this law - not get sufficient information, whether or
not the data processing infringes their privacy interests.

Inconsistancy is given, if the contents of notified processing
art not covered by its notified legal basis.'’"
(3) If the Data Processing Register in examining the notification finds that - due to the lack of a legal basis for
the data processing - privacy interests of data subjects, that
need protection, are endangered, the Data Protection Commission
shall be informed. If the Data Protection Commission shares the concerns of the Data Processing Register, it shall communicate
them to the highest competent administrative body.
(4) If the Register’s instruction to complete a notification
is not complied with in due time, the Register shall submit the
notification to the Data Protection Commission. The defects
shall be substantiated. If the Commission finds that the,
notification is incomplete, registration shall be refused.
Otherwise the Register shall be instructed to register.


(5) Further provisions for the registration are to be found
in sec. 23b.

Data Protection Order
Sec. 9.(1) The supreme organs of the Federation and the Lander
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of p. 2, issue after
consultation of the Data Protection Commission a Data
Protection Order for each data controller subject to their
supervision, in which - depending on the kind of data - the
principles for their collection, processing, use and the
conditions for the greatest possible protection of personal
data shall be stated.
(2)Autonomous or semi-autonomous bodies shall, to the
extent they process, transmit and commit data issue a Data
Protection Order in accordance with p. 1. That Order shall be
subject to approval by the supervisory authorities. The supervisory authorities shall consult the Data Protection
Commission. Approval shall be given if the Order complies with
the statutory provisions.

Data security measures

Sec. 10. (1) For all organisational parts of- a data
controller or a data processor, which are using data, measures
for data protection have to be taken. According to the quality
of the data used, to the extent and purpose of the application
and under consideration of technical possibilities and of
economic reasonability those measures have to ensure that data
are used lawfully and protected from unauthorized access.
(2) Insofar as it is necessary for the fulfilment of the
second sentence of p. 1,

1. the competences for the application of data shall be explicitly distributed among subdivisions and employees,
2. the application of data must be subject to orders of the
competent subdivisions or employees,
3. each employee has to be informed about his duties according
to this law and in particular to the regulations on data
security,
4. access to the rooms of the data controller and the data
processor shall be regulated,
5. authorisation for the access to data and programs and the
protection of storage mediums from unauthorized access or
use shall be regulated,
6. the authorisation to the use of computers shall be defined
and each computer has to be protected from unauthorized use
by hardware- and software-measures,
7. the necessary data security measures shall be checked; for
this purpose protocols must be kept, which enable
authentication of the steps of processing.

(3) Prescriptions for data security shall be passed and made
available in such a way, that all employees at any time can
inform themselves about the actual prescriptions.

Right of Access

Sec. 11.(1) A data subject shall on proof of his identity
and on written request to the data contoller be informed in
writing within four weeks and in a generally understandable
form about his data, their origin and the legal basis for their
collection, processing, use and transmission, unless such data
- due to law or administrative order and in case of prevailing
public interest - must not be disclosed even for the data
subject. If data are or have been transmitted, the data subject
shall may also require information on the recipient.
(2) The data subject shall cooperate in this process. He has
to specify the EDP which may concern him or render credible,
that the files of the data controller contain his data because
of error or abuse.
(3) If a request under p. 1 is rejected as a whole or
partly, the data subject use gee written and reasoned
information on this rejec ion.
(4) The information under p.1 must be given free of charge if it concerns
actual files and if the data subjects in the context of this purpose
have not yet exercised their right of access this year. In all other
cases the Data Protection Order may, after consultation of the Data 
Protection Council prescribe a lump sum for cost compensation. The
amount of the compensation must be fixed so as to conver the necessary costs 
actually caused by the request for information. The request may
be refused, if the data subject does not cooperate according to
p. 2 or does not pay the prescribed cost compensation. Paid
compensations must be refunded without prejudice to further
claims for damages, if data have been used illegally or if the
access has led to rectification of the data.

Obligation to rectify or delete data
Sec. 12. (1) Any data controller shall without delay, but

not later than two weeks after establishing the factual basis
for the processing of data, rectify (delete) or get rectified
(deleted) data which are incorrect or have been collected or
processed in violation of sec. 6. If due to economic reasons
physical deletion or rectification of exclusively
machine-readible data are only appropriate at fixed times, such
data must in the meantime be deleted or rectified logically.

(2) Rectification or delection according to p. 1 shall be
carried out or initiated,
1. ex officio, or
2. upon reasoned request from the data subject, or
3. in pursuance of a decision of the authority competent for
the establishment cf the data, or
4. in pursuance of a decision of the Data Protection
Commission, or
5. in pursuance of a decision of the Administrative Court.

(3) if the facts underlying the processing of data have not
been established within tv;elve weeks after the request, the
applicant shall get reasoned information immediately in writing

(4) If the request from a data subject is rejected, he shall
get reasoned information in writing within four weeks.

(5) The burden of proof for the 'Correctness of the data
shall lie with the data controller unless the data were
collected on the basis of informations exclusively supplied by
the data subject.

(6) If the rectification or deletion of the data has been
carried out upon request from the data subject or in. pursuance
of a decision of the Data Protection Commission, the data
subject and in the latter case also that commission shall be
informed by the data controller.

(7) If data rectified or deleted according to p. 1 have been
transmitted prior to rectification or deletion, 'the data
controller has to inform the recipient of such data if the data
subject so demands, if he can prove credible a justified
interest and if the recipient can still be ascertained.

(8) Rectification and deletion shall be excluded if the data
were correct and complete at the time of collection and if the
purpose for which they were collected or processed excludes
modification of the data according to changes in the facts
underlying them.

(9) If rectification or deletion is made on the basis of a
decision of the author! y competent for the establishment of
the data, the data cont oiler shall be bound by that decision.

(10) In case of transmission and use of data, which are
disputed by the data subject as far as thei r correctness is
concerned, the data subject may reguire tha t the dispute be
noted, if neither the correctness nor the i ncorrectness can be
established. The data controller may apply to the Data
Protection Commission to decide whether sue h a note is to be
maintained.


Service in data traffic
Sec. 13.(1) Data controllers entitled to collect or process
data according to sec. 6 may consult service processors for
their- EDP, if this is necessary because of practical or
economic reasons and provided that the interests of the data
subject warranting protection or public interests are not
opposed to this.

(2) In the absence of special legal provisions for the

duties of service processors, sec. 19 applies to processors
within the private sector and mutatis mutandis to processors
within the public sector.

(3) The Data Protection Commission must be informed of an
intended consultation of a service processor except of cases,
where such consultation is explicitly provided for by law, or
where the service processor is an organisation which is
superior or subordinated tc the data controller himself or to
an institution superior or subordinated the data controller. If
the Data Commission decides that interests of the data subject
warranting protection or public interests are opposed to
consultation of a service processor, it has to inform the data
controller without delay.

Remedies for the data subject
Sec. 14. (1) The Data Protection Commission (sec. 35) shall,
unless the application of the data subject to access (sec. 11),
rectification or deletion (s~c. 12) is already subject of
proceedings before the competent authority, decide on complaints concerning violations of provisions of this law and
of implementing provisions based on it, insofar as the
complainant claims that his rights have been violated, as well
as or applications under p. 3.

(2) Where rectification or deletion of data has been
perfomed on the basis of a decision of the authority competent
for the establishment of the data, the Data Protection
Commission shall be bound by a final decision.

(3) If in administrative proceedings using processed data
the violation of provisions of this law or of implementing
provisions based on it is claimed, administrative proceedings
.shall be suspended - unless delay might cause damage - until
the decision of the Data Protection Commission (sec. 38 AVG
1S50 - General Administrative Procedures Law). Such decision
shall be applied for immediately.

Ex officio proceedings

Sec. 15. (1) Where proceedings under sec.. 14•prove that the
rights of other persons granted in this law or in the
implementing provisions based on it were violated, such
violation shall be officially stated by the Data Protection
Commission, which decision shall be communicated to the data
controller and service processor. The decision shall be
published by the Data Protection Commission in the Amtsblatt
(Official Gazette) of the Wiener Zeitung.

(2) The data controller or service processor shall comply
with the decision of the Data Protection Commission within an
appropriate period fixed by the Commission.

Joinder of proceedings
Sec. 16. If efficiency, speed, simplicity and
cost-effectiveness so require, the Data Protection Commission
shall join proceedings concerning the same data controller or
service processor.

Part 3
Private Sector

Permissibility of collection and processing
Sec 17(1). Data may be collected and processed by a person
not mentioned in secs. 4 or 5 only if the contents and the
purpose of this data processing are covered by his legitimate
tasks and if interests of the data subject that need protection, in particular as regards the respect of his privacy
and family life, are not infringed.

(2) Data may be processed for exclusively private purposes,
if the data subject has given them to the data controller or if
the data controller in his private sphere has received them in
some other legal way, in particular in accordance with secs. 7
or 18.

Permissibility of transmission
Sec. 18. (1) The transmission of data which have been,
collected and processed according to sec. 17 p. 1 shall be
permissible only if:

1. the data subject has expressly and in writing agreed to the
transmission, which consent may be revoked in writing or
2. the transmission is part of the legitimate tasks of the
person, or
3. the transmission is necessary for the safeguarding of
prevailing justified interests of third persons.

(2)The transmission of data which have been processed
according to sec. 17 p. 2 shall only be permissible with the
consent of the data subject.

(3) Paragraphs . 1 and 2 shall not apply in cases of a legal
obligation for transmission

(4) Existing obligations for confidentiality shall not be
affected by the permissibility of transmission'’according to p. 1 or 2

(5) Transmissions which are not registered shall be
protocolled in such a"way, that a data subject can get access
as granted in sec. 25. Transmissions according to sec. 23 p. 4
do not .require protocolling.

Service in data traffic
Sec. 19. Service processors may only use data for the data
controller according to the following obligations:

1. data may only be used within the mandate of the data
controller; in particular the unauthorized transmission of
data is forbidden;
2. all security measures defined in sec. 21 shall be taken; in
particular the data processing must be performed only by
employees, who - according to sec. 20 - have committed to
the confidentiality of data;
3. in case of an intended consultation of a further service
processor the data controller must be infomed in such time
that he can prohibit such consultation;
4. in cases where it might - due to the character of the
service - be appropriate, all necessary technical and
organisational measures for the performance of the
controller's duties to grant access, to rectify and to
delete must be taken in consultation with the data
contro1ler;
5. after the end of the service all results of service
processing and all documents containing data must be
transmitted to the data controller or according to his
mandate be destroyed or kept for him;

6. the data controller shall be given all informations
necessary to control the compliance with,the obligations
mentioned in p.l to 5 above.

Confidentiality of data
Sec. 20. (1) Automatically processed data which have been
entrusted or made accessible within employment relations may,
without prejudice to other obligations to confidentiality, only
be transmitted on the basis of the express instruction of the
data controller, the employer or their representatives
(confidentiality of data).

(2) Data controllers and service processors shall conclude
contracts with their employees, where those explicitely
stipulate to transmit automatically processed data only on the
basis of instructions according to p. 1 and to keep the data
confidential even after “the end of the contractual relationship
to the data controller or service processor.

(3) The employer shall be responsible for the completeness
and the lawfulness of instructions concerning transmission of
data and for sufficient information of the employees about
these instructions.
(4) The refusal of an employee to carry out an instruction
infringing sec. 16. may not lead to any detriment of the
employee.
(5) Nobody is entitled to invoke the confidentiality of data
as a reason for withholding testimony in official proceedings.

Measures of Data Security
Sec. 21. Data controllers and service processors within the
private sector shall undertake all necessary'measures of data security as prescribed by
sec. 10. 

Notification of data controllers
Sec. 22.

(1) Every data controller processing data according
to sec. 17 p. 1 shall, when beginning with data processing,
notify his name (other designation), his address and his
legitimate task for registration and to submit such documents which are necessary to substantiate this. Modifications of
these data shall be notified without any delay.


(2) If the data controller performs standardised processing
(sec. 23 p. 4) he shall in addition notify which cases of
standardised processing he performs.

(3) The data controller shall use the registration number
(sec. 23b p. 2), which is attributed to him in the case of
registration, whenever he transmits data or gives informations
to the data subject.

Notification of data processing and transmission
Sec. 23.(1) Data-controllers shall, encept of the cases
mentioned in p.(4) at the beginning of a sepecific data
processing notify it to the Data Processing Register for
registration.

(2) This notification shall contain:
1. the name (other designation) and the address of the data
controller;

2. the registration number of the data controller, if it has
already been attributed to him;

3. the purpose of the notified processing;

4. the groups of data subjects affected by the processing as
well as the classes of :their data;

5. if data transmissions are envisaged - the groups of data
subjects affected by the processing as well as the classes
of their data which shall be transmitted and - if transborder transmission is evisaged - the recipient country

6. if a license for international data traffic according to secs. 32 to 34 had to be applied for - the file number
of the Data Protection Commissioner's license. 

(3) Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply mutatis mutandis to
changes in notified data processing.

(4) Types of data processing and transmissions, which are
performed by a great number of data controllers and the
contents of which are defined by law or by a contract with the
data subject, may be declared as-standard types of-processing
by an Order of the Federal Chancellor. These standard types of
processing-, are exempted from mandatory notification. The Order
may in exceptional cases retain mandatory notification if this
is necessary for the protection of the privacy interests of
data subjects.

Proceedings for notification of defects
Sec. 23a.

(1) If a notification is incomplete in the sense

of p. 2, the Data Processing Register may within two months
instruct the data controller to complete it within an adequate
prescribed period of time.

(2) If the Data Processing Register in examining the
notification finds that - due to the lack of a legal basis for
the data processing - privacy interests of data subjects, that
need protection, are endangered, the Data Protection Commission
shall be informed. If the Data Protection Commission shares the
concerns of the Data Processing Register, it shall order by
decree the provisional suspension of the data processing or of
parts of it.

(3) Decress according to p. 2 come out of force with the end
of the procedure mentioned in p.(4), but in any case after
6 months at the latest.

(4) If the Register's instruction to complete a notification
is not complied with in due time, the Register shall submit the
notification to the Data Protection Commission. The defects
shall be substantiated. If the Commission finds that the
notification is incomplete, registration shall be refused and
further data processing shall be forbidden. Othervise the
Register shall be instructed to register.


Registration

Sec. 23b. (1) Notifications according to secs. 8, 22 and 23
shall be registered in the Data Processing Register, if
1. within two months after notification no instruction to
complete the notification is given,
2. the data controller completes the notification according to
the instructions in due time, or
3. the Register has been instructed by the Data Protection
Commission to do so.

(2) The data controller shall be informed about the
registration in writing; his excerpt from the Register shall be
attached. The information shall contain the registration number
that has "been'attributed to him. 
(3) The registration in no ways can prejudge a decision of
the competent authority on the lawfulness of a specific data
processing.
(4) Erasures and alterations in the Data Processing Register
may take place on request of a registered Person or in pursuit
of a decree of the Data Protection Commission according to
P. (5).
(5) If the Data Processings Register gets subsequent
informations about facts, which cause the incompleteness of
registrations, it has to start proceedings for notification of
defects ex officio. Sec. 23a is applicable, but the Data
Protection Commission may order by decree a rectification if
names or addresses have been changed. The proceedings for
notifications of defects shall be noted in the register until
they are finished.

(6) The Federal Chancellor shall - after consultations of
the Data Protection Council - pass an Order with detailed
regulations for the registration. Transparency of registrations
and simplicity of access to the register shall be considered in
this context.


Registration fee
Sec. 24.(1) For the use of the Data Processing Register
according to secs. 22 and 23a a fee shall be payed; the payment
shall be established together with the notification. The
Federal Chancellor shall - after consultation of the Data
Processing Council - regulate the modalities of payment by
Order. The amount of the fee is AS 700,-- for a first
notification which does not contain exclusively standard types
of data processing, and AS 150, for a notification of changes
and for a notification, which exclusively contains standard
types of data processing.

(2) The registration fee may be prescribed by decree of the
Data Protection Commission, if the payment is not established
together with the notification.

(3) Notifications which aim at the complete erasure of a 
data controller from the register or which only contain changes
of name and address of the data controller are free of charge.

Right of Access
Sec. 25. (1) A data subject shall on proof his identity be
informed by the data controller about his data and their
origin. If these data have been transmitted, the data subject
shall in addition be informed about the recipient. The
information shall be given within four weeks in writing and in
a general understandable form, if the data subject is not
satisfied with oral information. If the data subject agrees,
instead of written information direct access with the
possibility of making printouts or copies may be given.
(2) If data are processed according to sec. 19, information,
about the name and address o£ the.service processor shall be
given.
(3) The data subject shall cooperate in this process. He has
to specify the EDP which may concern him or render credible,
that the files of the data controller contain his data because
of error or abuse.

(4) The information under p. 1 must be given free of charge
if it concerns actual files and if the data subject in the
context of this purpose has not yet .exercised his .right of
access this year. In .all other cases the Data Protection Order .
may -r after consultation of the Data Protection Council .
-prescribe a lump sum for cost compensation. The amount of.the
compensation must be fixed so as to cover the necessary costs
.actually caused by the request for information.* The request may
be refused, if the data subject does not cooperate according to
p. 3 or does not pay the prescribed cost compensation. Payed
compensations must be refunded without prejudice to further
claims for damages, if data have been used illegally or if the
access has led to rectification of the data.

(5) Legal obligations for secrecy shall remain untouched.

(6) Information may not be given, if it endangers prevailing
justified interests of -the data controller or of third parties
and if the reasons are communicated to the data subject.

(7) If a request under p. 1 is rejected asa whole or
partly, the data subject must get written and reasoned
information on this rejection within four weeks.

(8) From the moment when a data controller receives a
request for access he may not delete those data within a
time-frame of four months or before the final judicial
decisions, except of cases, where deletion is performed
regularly and has been initiated in advance.

Obligation to rectify data
Sec. 26. (1) If for reasons of efficiency data stored
on an exclusively automatically readable data medium can be rectified
physically only at specific times, such data shall first be rectified
logically and then physically at such times. 

(2) In case of transmission and use of data, which are disputed by the data subject as far as their correctness is
concerned, the data subject may require a note concerning the
dispute to be added to the data, -df .no agreement as to the correctness of data can be achieved. Such a note may only be
deleted with the consent of the data subject or on the basis of
a final judicial decision. If the request for rectification (p.
1) is brought before a court and rejected, the judgement shall
on request of the data controller declare that the note be
deleted. The data controller may appeal to court for the
deletion of the note concerning the dispute, if he can prove
the correctness of the data (Sec.12 p.5).

Obligation to delete data

Sec. 27(1) Data shall be deleted, 

1. if their collection or storage is illegal; 
or

2. on request from the data subject, if their collection or
storage is no longer necessary for the purposes of the EDP
and unless the deletion is contrary to prevailing and
justified interests of the data controller or a third party
or to a statutory obligation to keep the data.

(2)If for reasons of efficiency data stored on an exclusively
automatically readable data medium can be rectified only at
specific times, such data shall first be rectified logically
and then physically at such times.

Liability
Sec. 28. (1) Rights arising from this part 3 of this law may
be enforced against persons who are not mentioned in secs. 4
and 5 before the ordinary courts.


(2) If data are processed, used or transmitted in violation
of this law or of implementing provisions based on it, the data
subject may, without prejudice to other claims for damages,
demand abolition of and abstention from such a violation.

Civil proceedings

Sec. 29(1) Original jurisdiction in respect of actions filed in
accordance with this Federal Act shall lie with the Regional
Court competent for civil matters of the Land where the data
subject has his ordinary residence or headquarters. The data
subject may bring an action also before the Regional Court of
the Land where the data controller or the service processor has
his ordinary residence or headquarters.

(2) Actions filed in accordance with this Federal Act in
respect of labuF issues within.the meaning of section 50 of
the-Federal Law on the Jurisdiction of Labor and Social
Courts, Federal Law Gazette No. 104/1985, shall be subject
to the said law; as far as jurisdiction in concerned,
however, para. 1 shall be applied mutatis mutandis.

(3) The Data Protection Commission shall, unless it is party
to the procedure concerned, at the request of the court give
its expert opinion on technical and organizational matters of
data protection in procedures arising from this law.
(4) On request of a data subject the Data Protection
Commission shall, if such action appears necessary for the data
protection interests protected by this law as well as the
interests of a greater number of data subjects ,•-accede to the
proceedings on the side of the data subject as intervening
third party (§§ 17 et seq. Code of Civil Procedure).


(5) The court may in its judgment declare that decisions
shall be entered into the Data Processing Register if this
appears necessary for the safeguarding of the data protection
interests protected by this law as well as the interests of a
greater number of data subjects.


Temporary measures

Sec. 30. Temporary measures may be issued to safeguard
• claims for discontinuance of violations of this law, even in
cases where the provisions of section 381 of the Execution Act
(Exekutionsordnung) do not apply.
"
Jurisdiction for the issue of temporary injunctions applied
for prior to the institution of legal proceedings shall lie
with the Regional Courts mentioned in section 39 paras. 1 and
2, sitting as labour and social courts in matters pertaining to
labour law, als well as the Vienna Labour and Social Court."


Rights of the Works Council
Sec. 31. The rights given to the Works Council by the Labour
Charter (Arbeitsverfassungsgesetz) shall.not be affected by
this law. The confidentiality of data (sec. 20) shall be
respected by the members of the Works Council.


PART 4

International Data Traffic
Transborder transmission and comitting of data
Sec. 32. (1) Transmission and committing of data into
countries with data protection regulations equivalent to the
Austrian law does not require a licence from the Data
Protection Commission. An Order issued by the Federal
Chancellor after consultation of the Data Protection Council
shall state to which extent such equivalence exists.


(2) Transborder transmissions and committings do not require
a licence, if
1. they take place according to national or international legal
provisions which explicitly mention the classes of
transmitted or committed data and the recipients, or

2. if the data subject asked for the transmission in writing,
which request may be revoked in writing, or

3. if the data have'been published legally in Austria, or

4. if the transmission or committings are such as exempted from licensing
by an Order of the Federal Chancellor after consultation of the Data Protection
Council, because they are performed by a great number of data controllers and the
contents of which are defined by law or by a contract with the data subject and if no
privacy interests of data subjects, that need protection, require examination by the 
Data Protection Commissioner (standard transmissions and standard committings). 

(3) Transborder transmission or committing may be exempt from licensing only if secs. 6, 7, 17 and 18 have been
complied with and if - in the case of transborder committting - written stipulation of the service processor
exists, that he will comply with the duties in sec. 19.


Licence for transborder transmissions

Sec. 33. (1) In all cases not mentioned in sec. 32
transborder transmissions of data require a preceding licence
of the Data Protection Commission.

(2) The licence shall be refused, if
1. the processing, from which the transborder transmission should take place, is illegal, or 
2. if the prerequisites of secs. 7 or 18 are not fulfilled, or
3. if privacy interests of data subjects, that need protection,
might be endangered by the international data traffic, or
4. if public interests or obligations of international law are
opposed to it.

(3) The Data Protection Commission shall transmit a copy of
each decree,. by.which a transborder_transmission is licensed;
to the Data Processing Register; this copy shall be attached to
the registration file. 

License for service processing outside the country

Sec. 34(1) In all cases not mentioned in sec. 32 transborder committing of data for the purpose of service
processing requires a preceding licence of the Data Protection Commission.


(2) The licence shall be refused, if

1. the processing, from which the transborder transmission
should take place, is illegal, or
2. if the foreign service processor did not stipulate to the
applicant, that he will comply with the duties enumerated in
sec. 19, or
3. if privacy interests of the data subjects, that need protection, might be endangered by the international data
traffic, or
4. if public interests or obligations of international law are
apposed to it.

(3) The. Data Protection Commission shall transmit a copy of
each decree, by which a transborder committing is licensed, to
the Data Processing Register; this copy shall be attached to
the registration file.


PART 5
Data Protection Commission, Data Protection Council
and Data Processing Register

Supervisory bodies
Sec. 35. (1) Without prejudice to the jurisdiction of
ordinary courts a Data Protection Commission as well as a Data '
Protection Council shall be established to safeguard data
protection according to this law.

(2) The management of the bodies mentioned in p. 1 shall be
the responsibility of the Federal Chancellor’s Office. The
Federal Chancellor shall on the proposal of the Data Protection
Council provide for the staff required for these bodies. In the
execution of their duties, the members of the staff shall
receive their instructions from the chairmen ortsuch membres of
the bodies as specified in their rules of procedure. ' •

Competence of the Data Protection Commission
Sec. 36. (1) The Data Protection Commission shall - in
addition to the competences mentioned in secs. 8a, 9, 12, 13,
16, 23a, 23b, 24, 32, 37, 38, 39, 44, 45, 50 and 52 - be
competent for the following matters:

1. dealing with complaints (sec. 14) as well as proceedings
under sec. 12 p.(10);
2. initiating and handling of ex-officio-proceedings according
tc sec. 15;
3. decisions relating to entries into the Data Processing
Register (sec. 47);
4.licenses necessary for international data traffic (secs. 32
to 34);
5. establishment of its own rules of procedure.


(2) In addition, the Data Protection Commission shall be
competent for the formulation of reports under Sec. 46, p. 1,
of recommendations under Sec. 41 and the participation in legal
proceedings.

(3) Decisions of the Data Prptection Commission .may not be
set aside or modified in an administrative procedure."
Complaints shall be brought before the Administrative Court.

(4) (Constitutional provision) Complaints to the
Administrative Court shall also be permitted in cases covered
by Art. 130 p. 1 (c) of the Federal Constitution.

Effect of decisions

Sec. 37. .(1) If the Data Protection Commission states a
violation of this law or of implementating provisions based on
it, administrative athorities shall be obliged to create
without delay and with all legal means available a situation
corresponding to the legal opinion of the Data Protection
Commission. The decision of the Data Protection Commission
shall specify the authority responsible for its execution. The
execution procedure shall be governed by the provisions
normally applicable to this authority.

(2) In cases where delay may prejudice the interests of the
.data subject the Data Protection Commission may forbid the use
or of data or specific processing operations pending a decision
by the Data Protection Commission under secs. 14 or 15.

Composition of the Data Protection Commission

Sec. 38.(1) The Data Protection Commission shall consist of
four members appointed by the Federal President on the proposal
of the Federal Governement for a period of five1 years. Members
may be reappointed. One member shall be a judge. Members shall
have experience in the field of data protection.

(2) The proposal of the Federal Government for the
appointment of the. members of the Data Protection Commission
shall be prepared by the Federal Chancellor. He shall have
regard to the following proposals:
1. three names proposed by the President of the Supreme Court
of justice for the judicial member;
2. two members proposed by the Lander.

(3) One proposed member shall be a lawyer from the
Federation's civil service.
(4) For every member a substitute member shall be appointed.
The substitute member shall taka the place of the member if the
latter is unable to fulfill his duties.
(5) The following persons may not be members of the Data
Protection Commission:
1. members of the Federal Government or of a Land government o
Secretaries of State;
2. persons directly concerned with the processing of data
covered by the provisions rof this 'law;
3. persons not eligible for the National Assembly.

(6) Where a member of the Data Protection Commission fails,
without adequate excuse, to respond to notifications of three
consecutive meetings or if one of the grounds for exclusion
specified in p. 5 “subsequently covers him, the Data Protection
Commission shall, after hearing the member concerned, decide on
this accordingly. Such decision shall entail the loss of
membership. In all other cases a member of the Data Protection
Commission may only be deprived of his office on serious
grounds 'and by a decision of the Data Protection Commission
-approved by at least two Members.

(7) Paragraphs 2, 3, 5 and 6 shall apply to substitute
members mutatis mutandis.

(8) Where membership ceases before the expiration of a
member's term of office by reason of death, voluntary
resignation or in accordance with p. (6), the respective
substitute member shall,become a member of the Data Protection
Commission and a new substitute member shall be appointed in
accordance with p. 2 and 3 for the remainder of the term of
office.

(9) The members of the Data Protection Commission shall be
entitled to claim their travel expenses (cost scale 5) in
accordance with the rules applicable to federal civil servants
in the general administration. They shall also be entitled to
remuneration for the time and effort they devote to their
duties, to be determined by the Federal Government by Order on
the proposal of the Federal Chancellor.

Chairmanship and Secretariat of the Data Protection Commission

Sec. 39. (1)The judge shall take the chair of the Data Protection Commission. 

(2) (Constitutional Provision) The Data Protection Commission
shall issue its own rules of procedure in which one
of its members 'shall be entrusted with conduct of current
business which may also include procedural decisions.

(3) A decision of the Data Protection Commission shall
require a majority of votes. In case of equality of votes the
Chairman shall ‘have the final decision. Members shall not be
entitled to abstain from voting.


Independence of members of the Data Protection Commission
Sec. 40. (Constitutional Provision) The members of the Data
Protection Commission shall in the exercise of their duties be
independent and not bound by any instructions.

Recommendations of the Data Protection Commission
Sec.41. If the Data Protection Commission doubts the
legality of collection, processing, use or transmission of data
for or cn behalf of persons or entities under secs. 4 or 5, it
shall inform the highest administrative body responsible for
the processing in question of such doubts together with the
reasons therefore and recommendations how to establish a lawful
situation. The body concerned shall within a reasonable time,
which shall in no case exceed 12 weeks, either comply with the
recommendations and inform the Data Protection Commission, or
provide a written explanation of the reasons why the
recommendations have not been complied with.


Competence of the Data Protection Council
Sec. 42(1) The Data Protection Council shall - in addition to the competences mentioned in secs. 4, 5, 8, 11
22, 23, 23b, 32, 35, 44, 45, 46, 47, and 52 - be competent for the following matters:

1. requiring information and reports from the competent bodies
about issues of data protection within the public sector;

2. observing the effects of automated data traffic on the protection
of interests that need protection, in particular as privacy
and family life under sec. 1 of this law is concerned, and attaching 
the results of such observations to the report of the Data Protection Commissioner
under sec. 46 p.1 as well as any EDP-reports and plants of the Federal Government;

3. making proposals to the Federal Government, the Land
government and through them to the legislative bodies,
•- concerning possible improvements for data protection, which
are necessary for the protection of constitutional rights
because of the development of data traffic;

4. considering upon request of a representative of a political
party who is a member of the Data Protection Council
questions of fundamental importance to data protection;
5. establishing its own rules of procedure.

(2) The competent Federal Ministers ana Land governments
shall upon request of the Data Protection Council inform it
about their experience in the field of data protection in their
particular spheres.

(3) Court decisions and Settlements in proceedings under
this law shall be ,communicated to the Data Protection Council.

Composition of the Data Protection Council

Sec. 43(1) The Data Protection Council shall consist of:
1. representatives of the political parties: the greatest party
in the Main Committee of the National Council shall send
four representatives/ the second party three representatives
and every other party represented in the Main Committee of
the National Council shall send one representative to the
Data Protection Council. Where there is equality of seats
between the major parties in the National Council each of
these parties shall send three representatives;

2. one representative each from the Austrian Chamber of Labour
and the Federal Chamber of Commerce;

3. two representatives of the Lander;

4. one representative each from the Gemeindebund (local
authorities federation) and the Stadtebund (federation of
towns);

5.a representative of the Federation to be appointed by the
Federal Chancellor.

(2) Thu representatives referred to in p. 1 No. 3, 4 and 5
shall have experience in data processing within public
administration.

(3) For every member a substitute member shall be designated

(4) Sec. 38 p.5 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 

(5) Membership of the Data Protection Council shall continue 
until the time when other representatives are nominated by the
bodies with nominating power (p. 1).

(6) Membership of the Data Protection Council is honorary.
Members of the Data Protection Council who live outside Vienna
shall-where they participate at meetings of the Council, be
entitled to reimbursement of travel expenses (cost scale 5) in
accordance with the rules applicable to federal civil servants
in the general administration.

Chairmanship and Secretariat of the Data Protection Council

Sec. 44 (1) The Data Protection Council shall choose from 
amongst its members a chairman and two vice-chairmen. The term
of office of the chairman (chairmen) shall be five years,
irrespective of changes in the membership under Sec. 43 p. 5,
Such persons may be reappointed for further terms of office.

(2) Meetings of the Data Protection Council shall be
convened when necessary- Where a member or the Data Protection
Commission so requiresthe Chairman shall convene-a-meeting
which shall take place within four weeks.

(3) Deliberations and decisions of the Data Protection
shall require a quoram of no more than half of the
members. Decisions shall be made by a simple majority of votes.
In case of equality of votes the Chairman shall have the final
decision. Members may not abstain from voting.

(4) The adjunction of dissenting opinions is possible.

(5) The Data Proton ion Council may form among its members
standing or ad hoc working parties which may be entrusted with
the preparation expert appraisement and conduct of individual cases. 
It may also entrust the management, preliminary expert
appraisement and conduct of individual cases to an individual
member (the rapporteur).

(6) Every member of the Data Protection Council shall
- except where he has a justifiable excuse - 
attend the meetings of the Council. Members shall give due notice of their
inability to attend, whereupon the substitute member shall be
invited.

(7) Members of the Data Protection Commission who are not
members of the Data Protection Council shall be entitled to
attend meetings of the Council or its working parties. They
shall have no. right to vote at such meetings.


Provising Common to the Data Protection Commission and the Data Protection Council

Sec. 45. (1) (Constitutional Provision) All administrative
bodies or entities covered by sec. 4 and 5 shall give the Data
Protection Commission and the Data Protection Council all
necessary assistance in the performance of their duties, shall
enable them to inspect documents, data media and other
facilities concerned with the collection, processing and
transmission of data and shall on request provide the
appropriate information.

(2)(Constitutional Provision) The deliberations of the Data
Protection Commission and the Data Protection Council shall be
confidential. The two bodies may waive the confidentiality
where this is deemed necessary having regard to the subject
matter and aims of the deliberations and where confidentiality
is not required in the public interest or in the interest of a
party.

(3) The Data Protection Commission and the Data Protection Council may - where appropriate -
invite experts to take part in their deliberations on specific issues.

(4) The Federal Chancellor shall convene the first meetings of the Data
Protection Commission and the Data Protection Coucil. In the Data Protection Coucil
the chair shall be taken by the oldest member until the election of a chairman. 

Data Protection Reports

Sec. 46(1) Every two years the Data Protection Commission shall draw up a report 
on its activities as well as the experiences gained with them and transmit this report
to the Data Protection Council. 

(2) The Data Protection Council shall when receiving the
report of the Data Protection Commission draw up a report on
the development of data protection in Austria (Data Protection
Report) and transmit it together with the report of the Data
Protection Commission and a report on the activities of the
Data Processing Register to the Federal Chancellor.;


(3) The Federal Chancellor shall submit the Data Protection
Report to the National Council together with the attached
documents, with comments from the Federal Government, with a
report on the interna clonal development of processing and
protection of data, and with possible recommendations. As far
as the report deals with data processing of the Lander (sec. 5)
the Federal Chancellor shall transmit the Data Protection
Report to the Lander.


Data Processing Register
Sec. 47. (1) A Data Processing Register shall be established at the Austrian
Central Office of Statistics. The register shall be managed according to the 
instructions of the Federal Chancellor.

(2) The register is open to the public. Access to the Data
Protection Commission's licences for international data traffic, which are deposed together with the registrations,
shall only be given, if the applicant for the access substantiates that he is subject of the licenced transmission
or committing, and only if no prevailing interests of the data
controller or third parties in keeping those informations
secret are opposed to this.

(3) Copies from the register, which serve a data subject in pursuit of his rights, shall be given
free of charge. 

(4) The Federal Chancellor shall - after consultation of the
Data Protection Council -pass an Order with detailed
regulations for the management of the Register.

Part 6

Penal Provisions

Breach of secrecy
Sec. 48.

(1) Any person illegally disclosing or utilizing
data, which have been entrusted or made accessible to him
exclusively because of his professional occupation with data
processing, and the disclosure or utiiizacion of which may
violate justified interests of the data subject shall be
punished by court with imprisonment for up to one year unless a
more severe penalty is envisaged by another legal provision

(2) Prosecution shall require an application of a person
whose interest in privacy has been violated, or an application
of the Data Protection Commission.

(3) The general public shall he excluded from the oral
hearing if

1. the public prosecutor/(the defendant or any private party so
require or if

2. the court considers it necessary to safeguard the interests of third persons.


Unauthorized intervention with data traffic

Sec. 49. Any person illegally causing damage to the rights
of others by acquiring automatically processed data shall be liable to
punishment by a court of up to one year of imprisonment, unless
the offence carries a higher penalty under another legal
provision.

Administrative penal provision

Sec. 50. (1) Any person who processes data without having
complied with his duties for notification or licensing, or
continues data processing though it has been prohibited by the
Data Protection Commission according to sec. 23a p. 2, or
transfers data in contravention of sec. S p. 5 or sec. 22 p. 3,
shall be guilty of an administrative offence punishable by a
fine of up to AS 150.000. 

(2) The attempt shall be punished.

(3) The forfeit of data carriers and program may be imposed
(secs. 10, 17 and 18 VStG - Administrative Penal Code of 1950)
if such objects form part of an administrative offence under p.
1.

(4) The competence for decisions under p. 1 to p. 3 shall
lie with the Landeshauptmann.


(5) (Constitutional provision) Appeals against decisions
. under p. 4 shall be made to the Data Protection Commission.

(6) Final decisions under p. 4 shall be communicated to the
Data Protection Commission.

Testing of new working methods and techniques
of the public administration

Sec 52 (1) The provisions of sections 8 and 9 shall not apply
to applications as far as they are used by the legal entities
reffered to in sections 4 and 5 for testing new working methods
and techniques of the public administration before they are
generally introduced.

(2) Ordinances shall be issued for measures within the
meaning of para. 1 after hearing the Data Protection Commission
and the Data Protection Council. Such ordinances shall take due
account of the principles of the expediency and efficiency of
the public administration and shall specify the subject matter
and the area of application of pilot schemes pursuant to
para. 1 as well as the type and use of the data. Ordinances
shall be restricted
to a specified period which is to be
fixed in accordance with the time required for the assessment
of the pilot scheme.

(3) Ordinances within the meaning of para. 2 shall be
issued:

1. for applications within the sphere of the Bund
(sec. 4) by the competent Federal Minister or the
Federal Government;
2. for applications within the sphere of the Lander
(sec. 5) by the Land governments.

Applicability of Sec 7 in respect of administrative matters as provided by Art. 30 of the
Federal Constitution

Sec 53 Sec. 7 shall apply to data pertaining to
administrative matters assigned to the President of the
National Council under Art. 30 of the Federal Constitution,
subject to the proviso that unless the data subject has given
his consent explicitly in writing, such data may be Transmitted
only with the approval of the President of the National Council

Transitional provisions and final clauses

Exception for mass media
Sec. 54. From all non-constitutional provisions of this law
only secs. 19 to 21 shall apply to the collection, processing,
use, transmission or committing of data for automated
processing, if this is done by mass media enterprises or mass
media services for their journalistic activities.

Exemption from fees and duties
Sec. 55. All applications of data subjects for the
safeguarding of their rights which are based on this lav and
all applications in the registration procedure as well as the
excerpts from the register according to sec. 23b p. 2 are
exempted from all stamp duties and fees imposed by the
Federation.

Execution
Sec 59 The execution of this Federal Act is entrusted to the
Federal Chancellor and the other Federal Ministers within
their spheres of competence, unless such execution rests
with the Federal Government or the Land governments.