Law No. 293 of 08/06/1978
Act on Private Registers, etc. (Register Act)

WE MARGRETHE THE SECOND, by the grace of God Queen of Denmark, Do indeed: The Following has
adopted and We by Our consent confirmed The following law:

Chapter 1.

SCOPE OF THE ACT.
§ 1. Registration involving personal data; and where electronic data processing is used, and
systematically registration, which includes information on the private or financial situation of
associations or undertakings, or in other information on personal circumstances which may reasonably
be requested; Excluded from the public may only take place in accordance with the rules laid down in
Chapters 2 and 3.
Paragraph 2. Personal data means information that: can be attributed to specific persons, even if this
presupposes knowledge of: social security number, registration number or similar special identification.
§ 2. The law does not cover registration that is made for a public authority or otherwise covered by the
Public Sector Act. registers of authorities, without prejudice to Chapter 5.
Paragraph 2. Furthermore, the Act does not cover registration which: takes place solely for scientific or
statistical purposes or for the purposes of: Personal history studies or publication of general
Encyclopedias.

Chapter 2.

COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES, etc.
§ 3. Commercial enterprises, economic operators, Institutions, associations and the like may only register
as mentioned above in § 1 to the extent that registration is a natural part of the normal operation of
undertakings etc. of the kind concerned.
Paragraph 2. Information on race, religion and skin color, on political, sexual and criminal offences,
health conditions, abuse of Stimulants and the like may not be registered unless otherwise provided
legislation. However, registration may take place if the information has been provided by the person
concerned himself or obtained with his consent and there are circumstances in which he must know that
the information will be recorded. It is also a condition that it is necessary for the undertaking, etc. to be
in possession of that information in order to enable a legitimate safeguarding the best interests of the
company or others.
Paragraph 3. Creation of registers to warn others against business or employment relationships with a
registration may only take place with the prior authorization of: Registry Inspectorate.

Paragraph 4. The authorization referred to in paragraph 3 may be subject in particular to: certain types
of data are not recorded and the register is completely or be subject in part to the rules laid down in
Chapter 3.
Paragraph 5. The Minister for Justice may, after obtaining an opinion: from the Registry Inspectorate,
stipulate that specified registers are wholly or partly be subject to the rules laid down in Chapter 3 and
that certain types of information may not be be included in the relevant registers.
§ 4. Registered information on race, religion and skin colour, political, sexual and criminal offences,
health conditions, Misuse of stimulants and the like may not be disclosed without the consent of the
data subject or the person acting on his or her behalf, unless it follows of other legislation.
Paragraph 2. Other recorded information may only disclosed without the data subject's consent to the
extent that disclosure without Such consent is a natural part of the normal operation of businesses, etc.
of the kind concerned. Information on conditions that lie more than 5 years however, may not be
disclosed without consent unless it is obvious that This is essential for the assessment of the matter
sought clarified that the information is disclosed or the access to disclosure follows of other legislation.
Paragraph 3. Paragraph 2 shall not apply to: disclosure for the sole purpose of scientific or statistical
purposes. To the same end, notwithstanding paragraph 1: disclosure of information on health
conditions.
§ 5. Refuses the company, etc. at the request of a registered to delete or correct data claimed to be; false
or misleading, or to delete information that may not registered, or has the company not responded to an
inquiry within 4 weeks by the data subject, the data subject may refer the matter to the Registry
Inspectorate, which decides whether to carry out erasure or rectification.
Paragraph 2. The Registry Inspectorate may order the company to: notify all persons who have received
written notice of the correction; the information within 6 months prior to the data subject submitting his
request to the company. At the same time, the company must provide it registered notification of who
has received notification under point 1.
§ 6. In registers using electronic data processing (computerized files), an item of data must be deleted
where, because of age or for other reasons has lost its significance for the performance of the tasks of
the register.
Paragraph 2. Computerised files used continuously shall: be designed in such a way as to permit the
necessary updating of: Information.
Paragraph 3. Undertakings, etc. must carry out the necessary checks to ensure that false or misleading
measures are not introduced; information contained in a computerised register. Information that proves
to be incorrect or misleading, must be deleted or corrected as soon as possible.
Paragraph 4. The necessary steps must be taken: safeguards against misuse of information contained in
a computerised file; or comes to the knowledge of unauthorized persons.
§ 7. The provisions of section 6 apply regardless of whether The register is subject to electronic data
processing abroad.

Chapter 3.

CREDIT REFERENCE AGENCIES.
§ 8. Anyone who wants to do business with recording information for the purpose of assessing financial
soundness; and creditworthiness for disclosure (credit reference agency), must: Before starting the
business, make a notification to the Registry Inspectorate.
§9
Credit reference agencies may only record and disclose information that: by their nature are relevant for
the assessment of financial soundness and creditworthiness.
Paragraph 2. Information referred to in section 3(2) may not be recorded or transmitted.
Paragraph 3. Information on facts that militate against creditworthiness that is more than 5 years old
may not be registered, or divulged unless it is apparent in the individual case that the relationship is
essential for the assessment of the economic situation of the person concerned; solidity and
creditworthiness.
§ 10. Credit reference agencies must, within 4 weeks: after registration, notify the person first admitted
to the the register containing information other than name, address, occupation, profession; or
information which appears in the Official Gazette or can be freely obtained from Business Register. The
notification shall include information on the data subject's access to information from the register in
accordance with the provisions of section 11.
Paragraph 2. The Minister for Justice may, after obtaining an opinion: from the Registry Inspectorate
stipulate that other types of information can be registered without notification under paragraph 1.
§ 11. The credit reference agency shall at all times request the data subject to inform him, within 4
weeks, of the content of the information and ratings communicated by the agency about the person
concerned before for the last 6 months, as well as of the other information provided by the agency at
The date of the application shall be in the case of index cards, punched cards, magnetic tapes or
otherwise worked tapes, including those of the present reviews of the person concerned.
Paragraph 2. Does the agency have additional material relating to the data subject, this shall be
communicated to him at the same time; stating the nature of the material and the possibility for the
data subject to have access; to review it in person with the agency.
Paragraph 3. The data subject may not request to be made aware of the origin of the information,
subject to section 14.
Paragraph 4. The data subject may request that the agency make the notification referred to in
paragraph 1 in writing. The Minister for Justice shall determine: rules on payment for written
communications.
§ 12. Information on financial soundness and Creditworthiness may only be notified in writing, subject to
section 11(1) and (2). However, the agency may provide subscribers with summary information orally or
similarly, provided that the name and address of the author are noted, and Store for at least 6 months.

Paragraph 2. Publications of credit reference agencies may only contain information in summary form
and are distributed only to persons; or companies that subscribe to notifications from the agency.
Publications must: not contain information about the personal identification number of data subjects.
§ 13. Information or ratings that appear false or misleading persons shall be removed from the register
as soon as possible; or be corrected.
§ 14. Is a piece of information or rating that turns out has been falsely or misleadingly disclosed in
advance, the agency shall forthwith; provide written notification of the rectification to the data subject;
and anyone who has received the information or assessment within the last 6 years; months before the
agency has become aware of the relationship. The data subject shall: also be informed of who has
received notification under point 1, and the source of the information or assessment.
§ 15. Requests from a registered body for removal or correction of information or ratings claimed to be
false or misleading, or for the deletion of information which may not be registered or disclosed, must be
registered as soon as possible and within 4 weeks of receipt; be answered in writing by the agency.
Paragraph 2. Does the agency refuse to make the requested deletion or rectification, the data subject
may within 4 weeks after receipt of the agency's reply or after expiry of the reply referred to in
paragraph 1; deadline for reply; refer the matter to the Registry Inspectorate, which will take a decision;
whether to delete or rectify. The provision of Section 14 applies accordingly.
Paragraph 3. The agency's replies shall, in accordance with paragraph 2: in the case of cases, indicate the
right of appeal to the Court of First Instance; Registry Inspectorate and the time limit for this.
§ 16. Other transfer or surrender of: Registers may only be made to a notified credit reference agency
and must be notified to Registry Inspectorate without undue delay.

Chapter 4.

ADDRESSING AND ENVELOPING AGENCIES.
§ 17. Businesses that sell addresses over groups by persons, institutions, associations or undertakings, or
which: third parties envelop or send messages to such parties; groups, may only register:
(1) name, address, occupation, profession;
(2) information freely obtainable from the business register; and
(3) information on hobbies and similar information that forms basis for division into generally
recognized groups.

Paragraph 2. Information on race, religion and skin colour, on political, sexual and criminal offences,
health conditions, abuse of Stimulants and the like must not be registered. The Minister for Justice may:
provide for further restrictions on the right to register certain types; of information.
§ 18. The Bureau shall delete from its records any who so request in writing.
Paragraph 2. If the application is made to any person who: appears to be the sender, the latter shall
forward the request to the agency.

§ 19. Leaving associations and the like lists of members to an agency for the purpose of sending notices;
For the association, etc., the agency may not disclose without the association's consent the list of
members to third parties or use it for broadcasts of: Third Party Notices.

Chapter 5.
COMPUTER SERVICE BUREAUS.
§ 20. Undertakings which, on behalf of third parties, including a public authority carries out automated
processing of information such as: mentioned in section 1, must first notify the Registry Inspectorate.
Paragraph 2. The company may not without the consent of the owner use the information received by
the register for purposes other than perform the task to which the contract relates or have the data
stored; or work at others or abroad.
Paragraph 3. The undertaking must take the necessary steps security measures against misuse or access
to the data; unauthorised knowledge.

Chapter 6.
RECORDING AND ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING ABROAD.
§ 21. Information which, pursuant to section 3(2), may not registered in this country, may not be
collected for the purpose of registration in Abroad. Other systematic collection of information in order
to: Registration abroad may only take place with the permission of the Registry Inspectorate, because
then Wide registration in this country would require notification to the Registry Inspectorate or
permission under this Act.
Paragraph 2. Registers containing information as mentioned Section 3(2) may only be entrusted to
electronic data processing abroad With prior authorisation from the Registry Inspectorate. The same
applies systematic collection of information as referred to in section 3(2) for the purpose of: electronic
data processing abroad. However, the provision in paragraph 1 applies not if the register is only in this
country to be subject to electronic data processing.
Paragraph 3. The authorization referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 may be granted only if: when the
Registry Inspectorate finds that the transfer will not result in a significant Reduction of the protection of
the data subject that the law aims to ensure.
Paragraph 4. The Minister for Justice may, in order to comply with: international agreements or
otherwise to promote international cooperation; regulating the nature of activities covered by the Act,
stipulate that: The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2nd sentence and 2 shall not apply to: relationship with
certain other countries or certain types of registers. It can shall be determined only after obtaining the
opinion of the Registry Inspectorate and if: will not result in a significant reduction in the protection
afforded to it data subjects, the law aims to ensure.

Chapter 7.
SUPERVISION AND PUNISHMENT, ETC.
§ 22. The Registry Inspectorate supervises that there is no is in breach of the law or of regulations made
pursuant to law. The Authority shall of its own motion or upon complaint from a recorded, that the
register has been established and is used in accordance with: the law and regulations made pursuant to
the law.
Paragraph 2. The supervisory authority may require any information which: importance for its activities,
including in determining whether a matter falls under the provisions of the law.
Paragraph 3. In the case of activities which are: notifiable or subject to the provisions of Section 3(3),
Section 21, or provisions made pursuant to Section 3(5), the members of the Supervisory Authority and
staff at all times against proper identification without court order access to all premises from which the
register is or may be used, and to premises where the register or technical means are kept, or Used.
§ 23. The Registry Inspectorate may issue orders that: registration or disclosure that may not take place
under this Act; must cease and that existing records kept in contravention of the law, or An order issued
pursuant thereto shall be deleted.
Paragraph 2. The Authority may require an undertaking etc. to: delete or rectify any item which may not:
are registered or which the Authority considers false or misleading.
Paragraph 3. The supervisory authority may impose on a person or a company, etc. to delete or correct
information that has been registered; before the entry into force of the Act and which may not be
registered under the Act; or The Authority finds that it is false or misleading.
Paragraph 4. The surveillance authority may prohibit the use of a detailed Specified procedure for
collecting or disclosing information where the supervisory authority considers that the procedure in
question entails a significant risk of recording or disclosure; false or misleading information or particulars
which may not be used; be recorded or transmitted.
Paragraph 5. The Authority may require the undertaking, etc. to: carry out specified control measures to
ensure that: is or will be registered or disclosed information that may not recorded or disclosed, or
which is false or misleading; and measures to safeguard or prevent data subjects from being prevented
from doing so; Information is misused or comes to the knowledge of unauthorized persons.
§ 24. The Minister for Justice may, in order to comply with: international agreements or otherwise to
promote international cooperation; on the control of the nature of activities covered by the law, lay
down rules e.g. on the Danish Registry Authority's relationship with foreign supervisory authorities, on
the obligation to notify, on the deletion of registers and on the fact that the provision of section 22,
Paragraph 3 shall also apply to activities other than those referred to in that provision.
§ 25. Decisions of the Registry Inspectorate under this Act No action may be brought before any other
administrative authority.
§ 26. The Registry Inspectorate may lay down rules on form and content for notifications and
applications under the law.
Paragraph 2. The Minister for Justice may lay down rules concerning: payment of fees for notifications
and permits according to the law.
§ 27. Unless higher penalty is inflicted after it other legislation, punishable by a fine or liability of any
person who:

(1) violates section 3(2) and (3), section 4(1) and (2), section 5(2), second sentence, section 2,
Sections 6 and 8, 9(10), 1(11), (1) and (2), 4-12, 14(15), subsection (1), subsection (2) and
subsection (2), sections 3-16 and section 20(21) and (1);

(2) fails to comply with the decision of the Registry Inspectorate pursuant to section 5(1); or
section 15(2), 1st sentence,

(3) fails to comply with the requirements of the Registry Inspectorate under section 22(2);

(4) breaches any term or condition of an authorisation under to the Act or under regulations
made thereunder, or

(5) fails to comply with prohibitions or orders issued pursuant to to the Act or pursuant to
regulations made pursuant to the Act.

Paragraph 2. In regulations made pursuant to the Act: a penalty may be imposed either on a fine or
liability for infringement of: provisions of the regulations.
Paragraph 3. Is a violation committed by a limited liability company, cooperative society or similar,
liability for fines may be imposed on the company as such.
§ 28. The person who operates or is engaged in Activities referred to in Sections 3(3), 8 and 20 may, by
conviction for criminal offences, facts shall be disqualified if the facts shown justify a imminent danger of
abuse. In addition, Section 79(1)(3) of the Criminal Code applies. paragraph, paragraphs 2 and 3 shall
apply.

Chapter 8.
ENTRY INTO FORCE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
§ 29. The Act enters into force on 1 January 1979.
Paragraph 2. The provision of Paragraph 1(1)(3) of Law No 63 of 3 March 1948 on the provision of legal
assistance and on debt collection and Detective activities, etc. are abolished.
§ 30. For computerised files put into service before when the Act enters into force, the provision of
Section 6 shall not take effect until 1 year after the commencement of the Act entry into force.
Paragraph 2. Credit reference agencies existing by the entry into force of the Act and undertakings
which, at the date of entry into force of the Act, carry out Electronic data processing for third parties as
mentioned in § 20, must file notification no later than 3 months after the entry into force of the Act.
Paragraph 3. In relation to persons and companies, etc., registered with a credit reference agency at the
date of entry into force of this Act, the rule in Section 10(1) shall apply for the first time after the entry
into force of the Act; information subject to notification shall be recorded.
Paragraph 4. An undertaking which, at the time of entry into force of the Act: registers as referred to in
section 3(3) and carries out the activity As mentioned in section 21(1) and (2), the applicant for
permission to do so must submit an application for permission to do so no later than 3 months after the
entry into force of the Act.