

PUBLIC AUTHORITIES' REGISTERS ACT, 1978

WE MARGRETHE THE SECOND by the grace of God Queen of
Denmark do hereby make known:
The Folketing have passed and WE have given Our
Royal Assent to the following Act:


Part 1
Scope of the Act
1.1 This Act shall apply to EDP registers that are
operated on behalf of the public administration and contain
personal data.

1.2 By EDP registers shall be understood registers or
other systematic records for which electronic processing
of data is used.

1.3 For the purpose of this Act "personal data" shall
mean data that are referable to any identifiable individual
even if such referral presupposes knowledge of the personal
number, registration number or any like particular means
of identification of such individual.

2.
The minister concerned may after consultation with
the Data Surveillance Authority (in this Act referred to
as the "DSA") order that this Act shall apply to registers
kept for specified companies, institutions, associations
and the like that cannot be classified as part of the
public administration, provided that the greater part of
the operational expenses of such companies etc are covered
out of central or local government funds.
3.1 The minister concerned may after consultation with
the DSA order that this Act shall apply to other registers
containing personal data and kept for the authorities and
companies etc referred to in subsection (1) of Section 1
and in Section 2 of this Act.
3.2 The minister concerned may after consultation with
the DSA order that the whole or part of this Act shall
apply correspondingly to EDP registers kept for the
authorities and companies etc referred to in subsection (1)
of Section 1 and in Section 2 of this Act* and which contain
data on business enterprises.


Part 2

Establishing of registers

4.1 Establishing of registers to be kept for a central
government authority shall be subject to approval given
by the minister concerned in consultation with the
Minister of Finance.
4.2 Prior to a register becoming operative, directions on
the structure and operation of the register in question
conforming with the provisions laid down thereon in Parts 3
to 6 of this Act shall be given by the minister concerned
or by any party authorised by him to give such directions.
4.3 The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) hereof
shall apply correspondingly to linking of registers compiled
for different purposes, except where such linking is
effected solely for extraction for statistical or scientific
purposes.

5.1 Prior to approval or directions being given as referred
to in Section 4 of this Act, the DSA shall be heard.
5.2 Where a subordinate authority has been authorised to
give directions as referred to in subsection (2) of Section 4
and the DSA has not seen fit to accede to draft directions
submitted, the matter shall be referred to the minister
concerned, who shall make the final administrative decision.
6.1 Establishing of registers to be kept for a local
government authority including the Metropolitan Council,
shall be subject to decision made at a meeting of the local
council concerned.
6.2 Prior to a register becoming operative, directions on
the structure and operation of the register in questionconforming with the provisions laid down thereon in Parts 3
to 6 of this Act shall be given by the local council or by
the local government authority concerned.
6.3 Prior to decision or directions being made or given
as referred to in subsections (1) and (2) hereof, the
DSA shall be heard. Where the DSA does not see fit to
accede to a proposal submitted, the matter shall be
referred to the Minister of Finance, who shall make the
final administrative decision.

6.4 The provisions of subsections (1) to (3) hereof shall
apply correspondingly to linking of registers compiled for
different purposes, except where such linking is effected
solely for extraction for statistical or scientific purposes.
7.1 Participation in a register or a system of registers
established to serve local government authorities of more
than one local district shall be subject to the register
or system of registers being approved by the Minister of
Finance and to directions on the structure and operation
of the register or system of registers in question con­
forming with the provisions laid down thereon in Parts 3
to 6 of this Act being given by the Minister of Finance or
by another minister as decided by the Minister of Finance.
7.2 Prior to approval or directions being given as referred
to in subsection (1) hereof, the DSA shall be heard.
7.3 The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) hereof shall
apply correspondingly to linking of registers established
for different purposes, except where such linking is
effected solely for extraction for statistical or scientific
purposes.
7.4 Participation in a register or a system of registers
as referred to in subsection (1) hereof by a local government
authority shall be subject to decision made at a meeting
of the local council concerned. Any such decision by a local council shall forthwith be reported to the DSA, stating
any special terms and conditions governing such participation.
8.1 Any direction given pursuant to subsection (2) of
Section 4, subsection (2) of Section 6, or subsection (1)
of Section J of this Act, and any amendment made thereto,
shall without delay be submitted to the DSA.
8.2 Any direction given in respect of a register or a
system of registers shall be accessible to members of the
general public on application at the offices of the
authority or authorities responsible for registers and of
the DSA, except where secrecy shall be required for reasons
of implementation of prescribed checking, control, and
safeguarding measures or where other public interest is the
over-riding consideration.

Part 3
Storage of data and safe custody

9.1 Only such data shall be registered as are clearly
relevant to the purposes of the authority concerned. Other
data relevant to the purposes of another authority may- be
registered provided the register is blocked in such a manner
that these other data can be used only by that'other
authority.

9.2. Data on political matters, not accessible to members of
the general public shall not be registered. Other data on
purely personal matters, including data on race, religious
belief, or colour of skin; on sexual or criminal matters;
and on health or excessive use of intoxicants and the like,shal,l not be registered except where required for the
purposes of the register in question.
9.3 Any data registered that because of obsolescence or otherwise has lost its relevancy for the purposes of the register in question, shall be deleted. Continually operated
registers, shall be adapted for updating of data as required.
9.4 The Minister of Justice may after consultation with
the DSA permit copies of registers to be deposited for
safe custody in archives subject to specific conditions
laid down by the minister.

10. Directions applying to a register may lay down that a
party registered shall be advised o.f his registration.
Such notification shall advise the party registered of his
right to obtain information from the register by virtue of
the provisions of Sections 13 to 15 of this Act.
11.
Checking and control shall be implemented as required
to ensure that incorrect or misleading data are not
registered.
Data that prove to be incorrect or misleading
shall be deleted or corrected as soon as possible.

12.1 Safeguards shall be implemented as required to ensure
that no data registered be wrongfully used or brought to
the notice of an unauthorised party.

12.2 Such safeguards shall, where required,- apply also to
copies and transcripts (extracts) of the register; including
such copies and transcripts (extracts) as have been handed
over to other authorities

12.3 In the case of registers containing data of special
interest to foreign powers, measures shall be taken to
ensure that such registers can be removed or destroyed in
the event of war or warlike circumstances.


Part 4
A registered party’s freedom of access
to data on himself

13.l Upon application made by a party registered, the
authority responsible for the register in question shall as
soon as possible inform him of the data registered on him.
13.2 Directions applying to a register may lay down that
the party registered shall, at specified intervals, be
sent transcripts (extracts) of the data registered on him,
or that the party registered shall be entitled to make
request to that effect.
Rules may be laid down on fees
payable for such transcripts (extracts).
13.3 In the event that a party registered in a hospital
register or other register of patients or of' ill-health or
diseases, wants to be apprised of the data registered on
him, he shall file application to that effect with his
physician, who shall as soon as possible after receipt of
the application apply to the authority responsible for the
register in question.
The authority concerned shall as
soon as possible advise the physician of the data registered
on the patient, so that the physician can pass on the data
to him.
13.4 The provision of subsection (l) hereof shall not
apply if it is found that the registered party's interest
in knowing the data in question ought to be overridden by
public or private interests.
Where such considerations
apply to only part of the data in question, the party
registered shall be apprised of the remaining data.
13.5 The provisions of subsections (1) to (3) hereof shall
not apply to registers that are compiled solely for extraction
for statistical purposes.
In the case of other registers,
provision for exemption from .the freedom of access to data
by virtue of subsection (l) hereof may be laid down if the
provision of subsection (4) hereof may be assumed to result
in applications as referred to in subsections (1) to (3)
hereof being generally rejected.
13.6 Where a party registered has been apprised of data by
virtue of the provisions of subsections (1) to (3) hereof,
he shall not be entitled to apply again for a period of
twelve months from the most recent date of giving of
information, except where he can prove any special interest
in such renewed application.

14.1 Information given pursuant to subsection (1) of
Section 13, cf subsection (4) of Section 13 of this Act,
shall on demand be given in writing, always provided that
where the circumstances of the party registered so indicate,
it may be given in the form of oral information on the
contents of the data.
14.2 Information on data as provided for in subsection (3)
of Section 13, shall always be given the party registered by
the physician concerned and may be given in the form of oral
information.
The provision of subsection (4) of Section 13
shall apply correspondingly.
15. Any dispute arising as to the right to obtain information
by virtue of subsections (1), (3), (4), and (6) of Section 13,
of Section 14, and under directions laid down pursuant to sub­
sections (2) and (5) of Section 13, may be submitted to the
DSA.
Decision made by the DSA cannot be submitted for review
to other administrative authority.

Part 5
Passing-on of data
to private individuals, enterprises, etc
16.1 No data referable to an identifiable individual shall
be passed on to any private individual or enterprise etc,
except where such passing-on is permitted under the pro­
visions of Sections 17 to 19 of this Act or where the data
in question arc already accessible to members of the general
public or where the party registered or any other party
authorised to act on his behalf has consented to such
passing-on.
16.2 Consent as above referred to shall be given in writing
and shall specify:
1. the types of data that may be passed on,
2. to whom the data may be passed on, and 
3. how the data may be applied by the recipient specified. 

16.3 Consent given as above shall lapse at the latest upon
the expiration of a twelve month period.
17. Data on an identifiable individual may be passed on to
any private enterprise etc that pursuant to statutory pro­
vision or under agreement made assists in pursuing the
purpose of the authority concerned, always provided that
only such data shall be passed on as are necessary for the
work undertaken by the recipient enterprise on behalf of the
public authority.
The data passed on shall not be applied
to purposes other than those stipulated by the authority
responsible for the register in question.

18.1 Data on an identifiable individual registered in a
hospital register or other register of patients or of illhealth or diseases, may be passed on to a physician or a
dentist by whom the individual concerned is being treated.
The data passed on to a physician may comprise also data on
persons other than the individual concerned, including data
on dependants, provided such data may be of relevancy to the
treatment given the party registered.
18.2 Also identification data and information on diagnoses etc
may be passed on from the registers mentioned to physicians
for use on particular research projects.
Subsequent inquiries shall be made with the parties registered only to
the extent that permission is obtained from the physicians
by whom the party concerned has been treated.
18.3 In addition, data for use in research or planning
projects may be passed on from the register mentioned subject
to approval and conditions given and stipulated by the
Medical and Health Board. Passing-on of data for the
purpose of linking with registers to which this Act does not
apply, shall be approved only after prior consultation with
the DSA.

19.1 For use in any specific legal matter, isolated data may be passed on to private Individuals or enterprises etc
who can prove that their legal interest in obtaining the
data in question clearly overrides the considerations of
secrecy otherwise applicable to such data, always provided
that data that are subject to specific statutory rules on
secrecy shall not be passed on.
19.2 Data may be passed on for use in research subject to
terms and conditions as specified.
The provision of clause 2 of subsection (3) of Section 18 of this Act shall apply
correspondingly.
20. The minister concerned may lay down rules on fees payable
for handing over of data.

Part 6
Passing-on of data to public authorities

21.l Registered data may be passed on to public authorities
to the extent mentioned in Part 5 and also in cases where
pursuant to statutory provisions the authorities concerned
have freedom of access to the data in question.

21.2 Otherwise, passing-on to other public authority shall
be effected only where the data in question are of material
importance to the activity of the authority concerned or are
of material importance to the making of a decision by that
authority, cf however clause 2 of subsection (1) of
Section 9 of this Act, always provided that data shall not .
be passed on in contravention of specific statutory rules on
secrecy.

21.3 Data referable to an identifiable individual shall not
without.special authority be passed on from registers compiled
solely for extraction for statistical purposes or as part of
a scientific investigation, always provided that the DSA upon
application made in each particular instance may permit such
data.to be passed on to registers compiled solely for
statistical or scientific purposes.
Decision by the DSA on
passing-on as herein referred to shall not be submitted for
review to other administrative authority.

Part 7
Data Surveillance Authority

22.1 The Data Surveillance Authority (in this Act referred
to as the "DSA”), which consists of a council and a
secretariat, shall exercise surveillance over any register
to which this Act applies.
The DSA shall further exercise
the functions assigned to it by the provisions of the
Private Registers' (etc) Act.
22.2 The DSA shall of its own motion or upon complaint made
by a party registered, ensure that any register as referred
to in subsection (l) hereof has been established and is
operated in conformity with the provisions of this Act and of
the directions given pursuant to this Act.
23. The council, which shall be established by the Minister
of Justice, shall consist of a chairman who shall have the
qualifications required for appointment as judge, and of six
other members.
Members and alternates for these shall be
appointed to hold office for periods of four years at a time.
24. The day-to-day business of the DSA shall be attended to
by the Secretariat, which shall be headed by a manager.
25. The Minister of Justice shall lay down rules of procedure
for the council and detailed rules on distribution of work for
council and secretariat.
26.1 The authority or authorities responsible for any register
falling under this Act and the keeper of such register shall upon demand furnish the DSA with all particulars of importance
to the DSA.

26.2 Members and staff of the DSA shall at all times against
production of proper identification papers and without court
warrant be admitted to any and all premises from which the
register in question is administered or can be used and to
premises where the register in question or the technical
facilities for its use are installed, stored, or used.
26.3 The DSA shall report to the authority or authorities
responsible for a register falling under this Act and to
the minister concerned on any contravention of this Act or
of the directions given, and generally on any defect found. .
The DSA shall be informed of any measure taken by the
authority concerned as a consequence of the report made oy
the DSA.

27. -The DSA shall be entitled at all times to submit to the
authority by whom directions have been given, proposals for
The provisions of sub­
amendments to existing directions.
section (2) of Section 5, and clause 2 of subsection (3)
of Section 6 of this Act shall apply correspondingly.
28.1 The DSA shall submit an annual report on its activities
to the Polketing.
The report shall be publicised.
28.2 .The DSA shall further be entitled to publicise any opinion, given by the DSA pursuant to subsection (l) of
Section 5, subsection (3) of Section 6, subsection (2) of Section 7, subsection (3) of Section 18, and subsection
(2) of Section 19; any report made by virtue of subsection
(3) of Section 26; and any proposal submitted by virtue of
Section 27The provision of clause 2 of subsection (,2) ' '
of Section 8 shall apply correspondingly.

Part 8
Offence and Penalty Provisions
29.I Where other enactment does not prescribe more severe
punishment, any person who commits an offence as stated in
the list set out below'shall be liable"on conviction to a
fine or to lenient imprisonment:

1. disregard of terms and conditions stipulated in any consent given pursuant to s.16(2)
2. infringement of s.17 clause 2 or s.18(2) clause 2,
3. disregard of conditions stipulated by virtue of s.18(3) or s.19. 

29.2 Any direction given by virtue of Part 2 of this Act
may provide that infringement of any provision of such
direction shall be punishable by a fine.
290 Where an offence as hereinbefore listed is committed
by a limited liability company, a co-operative society or
the like liability to a fine may be imposed on the company
etc as such.

Part 9
Commencement and transitional provisions
30.1

This Act shall come into force on 1 January 1979.

30.2 In the case of registers and systems of registers the
operation of which dates from before the commencement of this
Act, the provisions of this Act shall not apply until twelve
months after the commencement of this Act.
At the latest
six months after the commencement of this Act, draft directions
on the structure and operation of any register as hereinbefore
referred to, conforming with the provisions of Parts 3 to 6
of this Act, shall be submitted to the DSA.
The provisions
of subsection (2) of Section 5, 'and of clause 2 of sub­
section (3) of Section 6 of this Act shall apply correspond­
ingly.
The Minister of Justice may extend the above time­
limits for specified registers.
30.3 In the case of any register which is operative or in the
process of being compiled at the commencement of this Act and
from which it is not possible without substantial alteration
to technical systems to provide transcrips (extracts) of
registered data, the provisions of subsections (1) and (3)
of Section 13 of this Act shall not have effect until three
years after the commencement of this Act.
31. This Act shall not apply to registers kept for intelligence
agencies of the police and the military defence.
32, This Act shall not apply to registers kept for local Authorities
or for National Government Authorities in the Faeroe Islands.

This Act may by Royal Decree be made to
apply to registers kept for the National Government Authorities
in the Faeroe Islands, subject to such variations as circum­
stances peculiar to the Faeroe Islands may require.
