ACT NO. 63/1981
respecting Systematic Recording of Personal Data
(Information concerning Private Affairs)
ICELAND

I
SECTION I
Scope of the Act
Article 1

The'present Act applies to any systematic recording of data concerning
private affairs, such as financial affairs of individual^ establishments,
concerns or other legal persons which should reasonably and normally be
kept secret,
The Act applies both to recording on the part of employers,
concerns, associations and establishments and under the auspices of official
parties.
Systematic recording of data means the gathering and recording
of specific and confined data into an organised entity,
The provisions of the Act apply to information concerning private
affairs pertaining to a specific part, although he be not named, if he is
specified by means of identification number or registration detail which
may be traced by those having a search key.

Article 2

Recording of biographical data according to Act No, 30/1956 is outside
the limits of the present Act and so is recording for the benefit of
genealogical research and biographical writings.

SECTION II
Authority for Recording


Article 3

Systematic recording of data covered by Article 1 is permissible only
provided such recording be a normal part of the activities of the party
concerned and extendsto those only who are connected with" his work or
sphere, such as customers, employees or associates.

Article 4

It is not permissible to record data which pertains to the nationality,
race or colour of persons as well as their opinion of politics or individual
political subjects and religious affairs unless special authority contained
in Law exist.
Recording is, however, permissible if the recorded person
has furnished information or this is acquired with his consent and under

3

such circumstances that it cannot be obscure to him that the Intention
be to record this in the manner specified in Article 3,
It is furthermore
a condition that it be of urgent necessity for a party to record the data
on account of his activities.
The provisions of paragraph (1) also apply to data concerning
violations committed by persons, their sex-life and health, use of
alcohol and other euphoretics and similar items of private life,
Official
parties, including physicians and hospitals, are, however, authorised to
effect recording without the knowledge or consent of the registered person
in case special authority contained in Law exist or recording be
unequivocally necessary on account of the effective use of the records cf
Article 3.

Article 5

The gathering and recording of data which pertains to the financial
status of people and legal persons or to creditability is not permissible
without a professional licence granted by the Computer Committee, provided
it be intended to grant others education about that subject.
It is not permissible to enter a register under paragraph 1 data
other than the name of a person or a concern, domicile, identification
numbers of persons or firms, position, occupation and information
available in official records, without advising the party concerned.
In
case other items are included in a record the party shall advise the
persons concerned and being specified for the first time in a record,
thereof within four weeks as of the recording and explain to the latter
his authority to be allowed to see a report on the subject of the
recording, cf Article 11.
Information relating to financial status pertaining to assessment of
credit may be furnished to others by letter only. When permanent customers
are involved information may, however, be granted verbally, but the name
and address of the enquiring party shall then be recorded and documentation
relating thereto shall be preserved for a minimum of six months.
Information in writing which is granted in accordance with paragraph 3
shall be dated and its normal time of obsolescence shall be quoted.

Article 6

It Is not permissible to link up records subject to the provisions of
the present Act unless there be a case of records of the selfsame recording
party. Here the self same recording party refers to same concern, associa­
tion or official establishment. Herein the linking up of records refers
equally to mechanical and manual transfer of data between records,
The provisions of paragraph 1 notwithstanding it is permissible to
link to a record information relating to a name, identification number
and address or residence although such data be obtained from the
record of another party.
The Computer Committee may grant exemption from the provisions of
paragraph 1 when it has been shown that this be urgent, cf Article 3
and paragraph 4, Article 16,

SECTION III
Recording of Data and Preservation thereof
Article 7

Effective measures shall be applied to prevent abuse of data or that
it reach persons who are not concerned.
Recorded data which have lost their worth on account of age or for other
reasons based on the part which the record is intended to play shall be
deleted. Records which are constantly in use shall contain data which are
correct at each given time, but obsolete information shall be deleted.
The Computer Committee may permit that copies or transcriptions from
records be preserved in the National Archives or other archives' subject
to further defined terms.

Article 8

In case information or assessment respecting financial status and
credit has been made available for others and this has proved incorrect
,r misleading the party responsible in accordance with Article 5 shall
be in duty bound to send correction in writing to all those having
received such Information from him during the past six months. The
corrections shall also be sent to the recorded party. The recorded party
shall also obtain a statement from the party explaining which corrections
have been sent.

Article 9

In case specific records contain information which is deemed likely
to be useful for foreign States, security measures shall be applied to
facilitate destruction of records without delay in case of the outbreak
of war or fear of eventual hostilities,.

SECTION IV
Concerning the Rights of Recorded Parties
Article 10

In case a party consider data relating to his private affairs to
have been entered in a specific record he may request the party responsible
for the recording to see to it that the subject of the information be
explained to him.
It Is obligatory to accede to such a request without
undue delay,
In case a person consider data relating to his affairs to be written
in hospital journals or other registers or records of patients and he
desires to obtain knowledge of the contents thereof he shall request his
family doctor or another physician who has dealt with the affairs of his
home to seek this Information from the party responsible for the recording.
That party will advise the physician about the information in order that
he may advance it to the person concerned.
The provision of paragraph 1 does not apply if the interests of the
recorded party derived from his obtaining knowledge are deemed liable to
be waived or other important private interests.
In case this is so
relating to some part of the information, but not other parts thereof,
the applicant shall be advised ahout the portions which it is not deemed
questionable to explain.
The Computer Committee may decide that records be exempted from these
provisions if it may be assumed that the special ruling of paragraph 3
would entail that request for information from such records will generally
be rejected.

Article 11

In case a party consider that Information about him be recorded in
accordance with Article 5 the recording party Is in duty bound to advise
him at his request of the contents of that data and the assessment which
the party has delivered to others during the past six months relating to
the applicant’s affairs. The party is also in duty bound to explain to
the recorded party which information is recorded relating to his affairs,
including an assessment of his financial status.
In case a party under Article 5 has in his keeping further documentation
relating to a recorded person or establishment than that to which an
application refers, he Is in duty bound to explain this to the applicant.
The recorded party cannot claim that he be advised of the origin of
the information.

Article 12

In case a party having been adapted to a record in accordance with
Article 5 desire that the recording party delete or correct an item
relating to his financial status or an assessment of his creditability
he shall be in duty bound to reply thereto without undue delay and at
the latest within four weeks as of the time of the receipt of the
request.
In case a party responsible for recording reject a request in
accordance with paragraph 1 the recorded party may within four weeks
as of the receipt of a reply or within four weeks as of the completion of
the respi-te for reply in accordance with paragraph 1 request the Computer
Committee to render a decision on a requirement for the deletion of
information or correction thereof. The provisions of Article 8 apply if
the requirement is acceded to.

Article 13

In case a recorded party consider that data concerning himself in
records to which the present Act applies be incorrect or misleading in
substance he may require that the party responsible for the recording
bring it into correct order or delete it.
In case a person or a spokesman of an association or establishment
consider his name or that of an association etc to be entered in a record
which is used for the despatch of circular letters, notices,, announcements
or propaganda, he may request that the name be deleted from the record
concerned and it is then obligatory to accede thereto.
In case a party responsible for a record refuse to accept a requirement
in accordance with paragraph I or 2 or has not replied thereto within
four weeks, the party concerned may require that the Computer Committee
stipulate whether a requirement relating to deletion or correction
thereof shall be accepted.
In case the Computer Committee accept a person's requirement for
correction or deletion the Committee will instruct the recording party to
correct or delete the data.

Article 14

In case a dispute or doubt arise in connection with people's
authority to obtain information in accordance with paragraph 1 Article 10
or 11 the matter may be submitted to the Computer Committee for resolution.

Article 15

A recording party is authorised to require a reasonable charge in
respect of information granted in accordance with paragraph 1 Article 10
or 11.
The Computer Committee may lay down provisions relating to a maximum
fee in this, connection.

SECTION V
Data Furnished to Others than the Recorded Party
Article 16

It is not permissible to disclose data from records to which the
present Act applies without the approval of the recorded party or if the
recorded data has been acquired with the knowledge of the recorded party
and in such a manner that he cannot be unaware of the fact that the intention
were to grant others access to the data, provided that such granting of
information come under the normal activities of the recording party.
It is permissible to disclose information if this cannot be traced
to specific individuals or legal persons.
The provisions of Article 5 apply to the granting of information from
records coming under paragraph 1 thereof* The provisions of paragraph 3
Article 10 shall furthermore be respected. Neither shall the provisions
of paragraph 1 abridge those of paragraph 3 Article 7.
It is permissible to disclose data, cf paragraph 1, provided this be
consequent of other Laws or administrative rules. It is furthermore
permissible to grant an administrative establishment information which is
necessary on account of the normal activities of the establishment.
Information which is subject to general secrecy according to Laws or
administrative rulings.

Article 17

It is permissible to grant a physician or a dentist who has a person
for treatment information from a hospital journal or its other record of
patients relating to the person concerned. When a physician is concerned
information may also extend to other persons, particularly to the relatives
of the person concerned when this is considered of importance on account
of the medical treatment of the recorded person.

Article 18

In case it be shown by an individual, concern, association or
establishment that these parties stand in need of specific recorded data
on account of a certain Court Case or other such legal requirements, it is
permissible to furnish information to the party deriving legal advantages
therefrom, provided that it be unequivocal that the need to obtain the
information be more important than the regard for maintaining secrecy in
respect of the data. This does, however, not apply to information which
is subject to secrecy according to specific provisions of Laws or
administrative rulings.

SECTION VI
Respecting Computer Services
Article 19

Individuals, concerns or establishments undertaking computer services
for others are forbidden to preserve or process data relating to private
affairs coming under the special provisions of Article 4 or Article 5 or
the exemption provisions of paragraph 3 Article 6 unless they hold a
professional licence granted by the Computer CommitteeComputer service means each section of automatic data processing by
means of computer technique.
A party as per paragraph 1 may not without the approval of a contracting
party use information which he obtains in connection with, the undertaking of a
requested project for any other purpose than that of discharging the specific
task which relates to the project request. He is forbidden to preserve
documentation relating thereto with others or to pass this on to others.
Under special circumstances, such as owing to sudden breakdown of computer
outfit, a party is, however, authorised to have computer processing under­
taken with another despite the fact that the latter party hold no professional
licence for such processing. The documentation and the processing thereof
shall, however, remain the responsibility of the party who originally accepted
the task, as it pertains to the provisions of the present Act.

Article 20

The personnel of a computer service concern In accordance with Article 19
are subject to secrecy respecting the items they find out in the course of
‘'heir work and they shall sign an oath of secrecy prior to commencing duty.
In case a computer service concern which is not operated by an
official, party work on tasks for such parties its employees are subject to
secrecy relating to the items they find out in the course of the execution
of the task in the same manner as the official personnel having worked on
it. Under such circumstances violations by an employee in respect of the
duty to maintain secrecy is subject to penalty in accordance with Article
136 of the Penal Code.

SECTION VII
Gathering of Data in this Country for Computer Processing Abroad
Article 21

Systematic gathering and recording of data relating to private
affairs for storage or processing abroad is forbidden.
The Computer
Committee may, however, permit this if special conditions apply.

A record or original documentation containing the information
specified in Article 4 may not be handed over for storage or processing
abroad without the approval of the Computer Committee.
Permits in accordance with paragraph 1 and 2 may be granted only
provided the Computer Committee consider that the handing over of records
or documentation will not to a marked extent abridge the protection provided
by Law for people and legal persons on record.
After having obtained the opinion of the Computer Committee the
Minister of Justice may decide, by means of Regulations, that the provisions
of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to specific records or fields of
information, or that the provisions do not extend to certain countries in
cases where agreements respecting the rights of nations relate thereto or
where consideration for international cooperation recommend this.

SECTION VIII
Respecting Supervising of the Act
Article 22

The Minister of Justice shall appoint a Committee of 3 which is called
the Computer Committee in the present Act,
The Committee shall be appointed
for a period of four years at a time. The Committee Chairman shall be a
lawyer who satisfies conditions to act as a Judge. One of the members of
the Committee shall have special knowledge of computer and recording matters.
He shall be nominated by the Icelandic Society for Information Processing,
Reserves shall be appointed in the same manner for a period of four years
at a time and they shall satisfy the same conditions as the principal
members of the Committee.
A member of the staff of the Ministry of Justice shall act as Secretary
to the Committee.
The Computer Committee undertake supervision of the implementation of
the present Act and resolve matters in dispute as stated in the Act.

Article 23

The Computer Committee grant professional licences in accordance with
Article 15 and Article 19 and permits in accordance with paragraph 3 Article
6 and paragraph 3 Articles 7 and 21,
The-Minister of Justice may fix a normal fee to be paid for the granting
of licences and permits in accordance with paragraph 1.

Article 24

The provisions of the present Article apply to recording activities
coining under the provisions of Article 4 or paragraph 1, Article 5.
The Computer Committee may instruct parties to cease recording or not
to furnish information to others from their records on documentation,
provided that the activities concerned be in conflict with the provisions
of the present Act in the judgment of the Computer Committee, and also
that individual items of data on record be deleted or that records be
totally destroyed.
The Computer Committee may furthermore instruct a responsible
recording party to delete the recording of individual items or correct this,
provided that there be a cdse of items which it is either not permissible
to adapt to a record or which the Computer Committee deem incorrect or
misleading.
The Computer Committee may prohibit the application of a further
specified method upon the collection of data for computer processing or
in forwarding information to others, provided the Committee consider the
method being applied to entail a considerable hazard of the recording or
granting of information becoming incorrect or misleading or that there be
a case of items which may not be adapted to a record

The Computer Committee may instruct a party responsible for activities
subject to the Act to apply special facilities to ensure that there shall
be no recording of items which it is not permissible to adapt to a record
or that information relating to such items shall not be granted.
This
also applies to items which are incorrect or misleading. The Computer
Committee shall also require a responsible recording party to see to it
that arrangements be made to prevent or reduce the danger of the abuse of
recorded information or that it become known to people who are not concerned.

Article 25

Other authorities will not be consulted about the Computer Committee's
resolutions.

Article 26

The Computer Committee may lay down rules relating to the form and
substance of notifications and applications in accordance with the present
Ac c.
In case the Computer Committee are intended to grant approval of
individual activities in accordance with the present Act they are authorised
to make the approval subject to conditions and a time limit.

Article 27

The Computer Committee shall publish annual reports relating to their
activities, The report shall show the professional licences which the
Committee have granted, rules which they have .laid down and decrees which
they have pronounced. The Computer Committee's annual report shall also
give an account of such other activities of the Committee with which the
general public may wish to be concerned or which it is in the interest of
the public to know of.

SECTION IX
Respecting Penalties for Violations of the Act

Article 28

Violations of Articles 4-6, Article 8, Article 11, paragraph 1 and
article 12 paragraph 3, Article 13 paragraph 1, Article 16 clause 2
paragraph 1 and 3, Article 19, paragraph 1 Article 20 and paragraph 1 and
2 Article 21 are liable to fines or custody unless a heavier penalty applies
under another Act.
It is subject to the same penalty to neglect abiding by a resolution
of the Computer Committee in accordance with paragraph 2 Article 12 and
paragraph 4 Article 13.
. It is furthermore subject to the same penalty not to respect
conditions which are imposed in respect of permission for operations
subject to the present Act or administrative rules laid down in accordance
therewith and also not to heed instructions or prohibitions directed in
accordance with the present Act or administrative rules laid down in
accordance therewith.
In case a violation be committed in operations undertaken by a Joint
Stock Company, a cooperative society or another business concern, penalty
in the form of a fine may be imposed upon the association as such.
A party engaging or participating In operations specified in Article 5
or Article 19 without permission may, in addition to penalty, be deprived
of the right to the operations in which he engages, provided that the
violation indicate immediate danger of abuse by a person in connection
with recording activities. The same applies to violation of Article 4.
In other respects the provisions of paragraph 1 and 2 of Article 68 of
the Penal Code apply here.
Equipment by means of which gross violations of the present Act are
committed and profit derived from the violation may be confiscated by
means of Judgment and the provisions of Article 69 of the Penal Code apply
here.

SECTION X
Entry into Force and Implementation
Article 30

The present Act enters into force on January 1st 1982 and will be
abrogated on December 31st 1985. Professional licences in accordance with
Article 5 and Article 19 and authorisations in accordance with paragraph 3
Article 6, paragraph 3 Article 7 and Article 21 shall be sought on account
of activities which have been commenced prior to the entry into force of
the Act within 3 months as of the entry into force.
The Minister of Justice shall have the Act revised and submit a Bill
relating thereto to the Althing at the beginning of the Session in the
autumn of 1984.
.

Article 31

The Minister of Justice is authorised to lay down Regulations relating
to the implementation of the present Act.