

Law 19628 ON PRIVACY PROTECTION
MINISTRY GENERAL SECRETARIAT OF THE PRESIDENCY
Publication: 28-AUG-1999 | Enactment: 18-AUG-1999
Version: Latest Version From: 26-AUG-2020
Effective Date: 26-AUG-2020
End Effective Date: 08-MAY-2023
Last Modification: 28-FEB-2020 Law 21214


ON PRIVACY PROTECTION
Bearing in mind that the H. National Congress has
given its approval to the following
P r o j e c t

PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
Preliminary Title General
Provisions
Article 1.- The processing of personal data in
registers or data banks by public bodies or private
parties shall be subject to the provisions of this law,
with the exception of that carried out in the exercise
of the freedom to express an opinion and to inform,
which shall be regulated by the law referred to in
Article 19, No. 12 of the Political Constitution.
Any person may process personal data, provided that
it is done in accordance with this law and for purposes
permitted by law. In any case, the full exercise of the
fundamental rights of the owners of the data and of the
faculties recognized by this law must be respected.
Article 2°.- For the purposes of this law, the
following definitions shall apply:
a) Data storage, the preservation or custody of data
in a registry or data bank.
b) Data blocking, the temporary suspension of
any processing operation on stored data.
c) Communication or transmission of data, making
personal data known in any way to persons other than the
owner, whether determined or undetermined.
d) Outdated data, that which has lost its relevance due to
The law, by the fulfillment of the condition or the
expiration of the term indicated for its validity or, if
there is no express norm, by the change of the facts or
circumstances that it consigns.
e) Statistical data, the data that, in its origin, or
as a consequence of its processing, cannot be associated to
an identified or identifiable owner.
f) Data of a personal nature or personal data, that
relating to any information concerning natural, identified
or identifiable persons.
g) Sensitive data, those personal data that refer to
the physical or moral characteristics of individuals or
to facts or circumstances of their private life or
intimacy, such as personal habits, racial origin,
ideologies and political opinions, religious beliefs or
convictions, physical or psychological health conditions
and sexual life.
h) Deletion or cancellation of data, the destruction
of data stored in records or data banks, and the
data, regardless of the procedure used for this purpose.
i) Publicly accessible sources, records or
compilations of personal data, public or private, with
access not restricted or reserved to applicants.
j) Modification of data, any change in the content of
the data stored in records or databases.
k) Public bodies, the authorities, State bodies and
agencies described and regulated by the Political
Constitution of the Republic, and those included in the
second paragraph of Article 1 of Law No. 18,575, Organic
Constitutional Law of General Bases of State
Administration.
l) Data unlinkage procedure, any processing of
personal data in such a way that the information
obtained cannot be associated with a specific or
identifiable person.
m) Register or data bank, the organized set of personal
data, whether automated or not and whatever the form or
modality of its creation or organization, that allows the
data to be related to each other,
as well as to carry out all types of data processing.
n) Responsible for the registry or database, the
private natural or legal person, or the respective
public body, who is responsible for the decisions
related to the processing of personal data.
ñ) Data subject, the natural person to whom the
personal data refer.
o) Data processing, any operation or complex of
operations or technical procedures, whether automated or
not, that make it possible to collect, store, record,
organize, elaborate, select, extract, confront,
interconnect, dissociate, communicate, assign, transfer,
transmit or cancel personal data, or use them in any other
way.
Article 3°.- In any collection of personal data
through surveys, market research or public opinion polls,
or any other type of public opinion polls, the following
shall apply similar instruments, without prejudice to the other rights
and obligations regulated by this law, the persons must be
informed of the mandatory or optional nature of the
responses and the purpose for which the information is
being requested. The communication of
The results should omit any signs that may allow the
identification of the persons consulted.
The holder may object to the use of his personal data
for advertising, market research or opinion polls.
Title I
On the use of personal data
Article 4°.- The processing of personal data may
only be carried out when authorized by this law or other
legal provisions or when the owner expressly consents
thereto.
The authorizing person must be duly informed about
the purpose of the storage of his or her personal data
and its possible communication to the public.
The authorization must be in writing.
The authorization may be revoked, although without
retroactive effect, which must also be done in writing.
No authorization is required for the processing of
personal data from or collected from sources accessible
to the public, when they are of an economic, financial,
banking or commercial nature, are contained in lists
relating to a category of persons that are limited to
indicating background information such as the
individual's membership in that group, profession or
activity, educational qualifications, address or date of
birth, or are necessary for direct response commercial
communications or direct marketing or sale of goods or
services.
The processing of personal data carried out by
private legal entities for the exclusive use of
themselves, their associates and the entities to which
they are affiliated, for statistical, pricing or other
purposes of general benefit to them, shall not require
this authorization.
Article 5º.- The person in charge of the registry or
personal data bank may establish an automated transmission
procedure, provided that the rights of the data subjects
are safeguarded and the transmission is related to the
tasks and purposes of the participating agencies.
In the event of a request for personal data through an
electronic network, the following must be recorded:
a) The individualization of the applicant;
b) The reason and purpose of the request, and
c) The type of data being transmitted.
The admissibility of the request will be evaluated by
the person responsible for the database that receives it,
but the responsibility for such a request shall be that
of the person making the request.
The recipient may only use the personal data for the
purposes for which it was transmitted.
This article shall not apply in the case of personal
data accessible to the general public.
This provision is also not applicable when personal
data is transmitted to international organizations in
compliance with the provisions of treaties and conventions
in force.
Article 6°.- Personal data shall be deleted or
cancelled when their storage has no legal basis or when they
have expired.
They must be modified when they are erroneous,
inaccurate, misleading or incomplete.
Personal data whose accuracy cannot be established or
whose validity is doubtful and for which deletion is not
appropriate will be blocked.
The person in charge of the personal data bank will
proceed to the deletion, modification or blocking of the
data, if necessary, without the owner's request.
Article 7°.- The persons who work in the processing of
personal data, both in public and private organizations, are
obliged to keep them secret, when they come from or have
been collected from sources that are not accessible to the
public, as well as about
The other data and background information related to the
database, an obligation that does not cease because its
activities in this field have been terminated.
Article 8 - In the event that the processing of
personal data is carried out by mandate, the general rules
shall apply.
The mandate must be granted in writing, with special
mention of the conditions for the use of the data.
The agent shall respect these stipulations in the
performance of his duties.
Article 9 - Personal data must be used only for the
purposes for which they were collected, unless they come
from or have been collected from sources accessible to the
public.
In any case, the information must be accurate,
updated and truthful to the actual situation of the data
subject.
It is forbidden to make any kind of predictions or
evaluations of commercial risk that are not based solely on
objective information related to the delinquencies or
protests of the natural or legal persons being reported.
Infringement of this prohibition shall require the
immediate deletion of such information by the person
responsible for the database and shall give rise to the
compensation for damages that corresponds to



Article 10.- Sensitive data may not be processed,
except when authorized by law, with the consent of the
owner or when such data is necessary for the determination
or granting of health benefits corresponding to their
owners.
Article 11.- The person responsible for the registers
or bases where personal data are stored after their
collection shall take care of them with due diligence, and
shall be liable for damages.

Title II

Data subjects' rights
Article 12.- Every person has the right to demand
from whoever is responsible for a bank, whether publicly
or privately engaged in the processing of personal data,
information on the data relating to his person, their
source and recipient, the purpose of storage and the
identification of the persons or bodies to whom his data
are regularly transmitted.
In the event that the personal data is erroneous,
inaccurate, misleading or incomplete, and is proven to
be so, you have the right to have it amended.
Without prejudice to the legal exceptions, it may
also demand that they be eliminated in the event that
their storage lacks legal grounds or when they are out
of date.
The same requirement for deletion or blocking of
data, if applicable, can be made when you have
voluntarily provided your personal data or they are used
for commercial communications and you no longer wish to
be included in the respective register, either
permanently or temporarily.
In the case of the preceding paragraphs, the
information, modification or deletion of data shall be
absolutely free of charge, and a copy of the altered
record in the relevant part shall also be provided at
the request of the owner. If new modifications or
deletions of data are made, the holder may also obtain a
copy of the updated record free of charge, provided that
at least six months have elapsed since the previous
occasion on which he made use of this right. The right
to obtain a copy free of charge may only be exercised in
person.
If the deleted or modified personal data have been
previously communicated to specific or identifiable
persons, the person in charge of the database must
notify them as soon as possible of the operation
carried out. If it is not possible to determine the
persons to whom it has been communicated, will place a
notice that may be of general knowledge for those who
use the information in the database.
Article 13.- The right of individuals to information,
modification, cancellation or blocking of their personal
data may not be limited by means of any act or convention.
Article 14.- If the personal data are in a
The holder may request information from any of them, and the
database can be accessed by different agencies.
Article 15.- Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Title, information, modification, cancellation or
blocking of personal data may not be requested when it
prevents or hinders the due fulfillment of the auditing
functions of the requested public agency, or affects the
confidentiality or secrecy established in legal or
regulatory provisions, the security of the Nation or the
national interest.
Nor may the modification, cancellation or blocking of
personal data stored by legal mandate be requested,
outside the cases contemplated in the respective law.
Article 16.- If the person responsible for the
registry or data bank does not decide on the request of
the applicant within two working days, or refuses it for
a reason other than the security of the Nation or the
national interest, the owner of the data shall have the
right to appeal to the civil judge of the domicile of
the person responsible, who is on duty according to the
corresponding rules, requesting protection of the rights
enshrined in the preceding article.
The procedure shall be subject to the following
rules:
a) The complaint shall clearly state the infringement
The complaint shall be accompanied by the means of
evidence that may prove them, as the case may be.
b) The court shall order that the claim be notified
by a writ of summons, left at the domicile of the person
responsible for the corresponding data bank. In the same
manner, the judgment shall be notified.
c) The person responsible for the databank must
present its disclaimers within five working days and
attach the means of evidence that prove the facts on
which they are based. If they are not available, they
shall state this circumstance and the court shall set
a hearing within five working days in order to receive
the evidence offered and not accompanied.
d) The final judgment shall be rendered within
the third day after the expiration of the term
referred to in the preceding paragraph, whether or
not the defense has been filed. If the court ordered
a hearing of
The time limit for proof shall run after the expiration
of the time limit fixed for such proof.
e) All resolutions, with the exception of the one
indicated in letter f) of this subsection, shall be
issued in sole instance and shall be notified by the
daily state.
f) The final judgment may be appealed in both
effects. The appeal must be filed within five days
from the date of notification of the final judgment.
the party filing it, it must contain the factual and
legal grounds on which it is based and the specific
requests made.
g) Once the appeal has been filed, the court shall
immediately submit the case file to the respective
Court of Appeals. Upon receipt of the case files at the
clerk's office of the Court, the President shall order
a preferential hearing of the appeal, without waiting
for the appearance of any of the parties.
h) The judgment rendered on appeal shall not be
subject to cassation appeals.
In the event that the cause invoked to deny the
requesting party's request is the security of the Nation
or the national interest, the complaint shall be filed
before the Supreme Court, which shall request a report
from the authority in question by whatever means it
deems most expeditious, setting a time limit for the
purpose, after which it shall resolve the controversy.
If evidence is received, it shall be recorded in a
separate and reserved file, which shall remain so even
after the case has been settled if the petitioner's
request is denied by an enforceable judgment.
The chamber of the Supreme Court hearing the claim
under the preceding subsection, or the chamber of the
Court of Appeals hearing the appeal, in the case of the
procedure established in the first and second
subsections, may, if it deems it convenient or if it is
requested with plausible grounds, order that the case
be brought before it in order to hear the attorneys of
the parties, in which case the case shall be added
extraordinarily to the respective table of the same
chamber. In claims on the grounds indicated in the
preceding paragraph, the President of the Court shall
order that the hearing shall not be public.
If the claim is upheld, the same sentence will set
a reasonable period of time to comply with the decision
and may apply a fine of
one to ten monthly tax units, or from ten to
fifty monthly tax units in the case of
of an infringement of the provisions of Articles 17
and 18.
Failure to deliver the information in due time
or delay in making the modification, in the manner
decreed by the Court, shall be punished with a fine
of two to fifty monthly tax units and, if the person
responsible for the required database is a public
body, the court may sanction the head of the Service
with the suspension of his position for a period of
five to fifteen days.


Title III

On the use of personal data relating to economic,
financial, banking and financial obligations.
or commercial
Article 17.- The persons in charge of the registries
or personal data banks may only communicate information
concerning obligations of an economic, financial, banking
or commercial nature, when such obligations are contained
in protested bills of exchange and promissory notes;
checks protested for lack of funds, for having been drawn
on a closed current account or for any other reason; as
well as the noncompliance of obligations derived from
mortgage loans and loans or credits from banks, financial
companies, mortgage loan administrators, savings and
credit cooperatives, public agencies and State companies
subject to common legislation, and companies that
administer credits granted for purchases in commercial
houses. The information related to credits granted by the
Instituto Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario to its
users, and the information related to economic, financial,
banking or commercial obligations insofar as they have
been repacted, renegotiated or novated, or these are under
any other type of obligation, are excepted.
pending mode.
obligations determined by the President of the
Republic by supreme decree, which must be
supported by instruments of payment or credit
also be communicated
validly issued, in which the
express consent of the debtor or obligor to pay and its
due date are stated The information may not be communicated
related to debts contracted with public or private
companies that provide electricity, water, telephone and
gas services; nor debts contracted with institutions of
higher education in accordance with laws numbers 18.591
and 19.287, nor those acquired with banks or financial
institutions in accordance with law No. 20.027, or within
the framework of the
The following may not be
reported:
any debt contracted for the purpose of receiving for itself
or for third parties a formal educational service at any
level;
nor may
debts contracted with the Ministry of Education, Science
and Technology be reported.
highway concessionaires for the use of their
infrastructure.
The responsible entities that managepersonal databanks
not publish or communicate the
information referred to in this article, in particular
protests and defaults contained therein, when theseArt
originated during the period of unemployment that
affects the debtor.
For these purposes, theSeveranceAdministrator
communicate the data of its beneficiaries to
Boletín de Informaciones Comerciales only while
subsist their benefits for the purposes of blocking the
the information concerning such persons.

However, persons who are not covered by unemployment
insurance must prove this condition before the Commercial
Information Bulletin, accompanying the legally issued
severance pay or, if there is a dispute, with the record of
appearance before the Labor Inspectorate, for the purpose
of claiming unemployment insurance.
right for three months, renewable up to once. In order for
such renewal to be effective, a sworn statement from the
debtor stating that he/she is still unemployed must be
attached.
The blocking of data will be free of charge for the debtor.
The blocking of data shall not apply to those who
have made entries in the commercial information system
during the year prior to the date of termination of their
employment relationship.
The entities responsible for the administration of
personal data banks may not indicate under any
circumstance, sign or characterization that the person is
benefited by this law.

Article 18.- In no case may the data referred to in the previous article be 
communicated, provided they relate to an identified or 
identifiable person, after five years have elapsed since
the respective obligation became due and payable.
Nor may data relating to such obligation continue
to be communicated after it has been paid or otherwise
legally extinguished.
However, the information required by the courts in
connection with pending lawsuits will be communicated
to the courts of justice.
Article 19.- The payment or extinction of these
obligations by any other means does not cause the lapse or
the loss of legal basis of the respective data for the
purposes of Article 12, as long as they are
pending the deadlines set forth in the preceding article.
When payment is made or the obligation is
extinguished by another means in which the creditor
intervenes directly, the creditor shall notify such fact,
at the latest within the following seven working days, to
the person in charge of the registry or data bank
accessible to the public that at the time communicated the
protest or the delinquency, in order to enter the
corresponding new data, upon payment of the fee if
applicable, at the debtor's expense. The debtor may choose
to directly request the modification to the data bank and
release the creditor who provides sufficient proof of
payment from compliance with this obligation; such
decision must be expressed in writing.
Those who process personal data coming from or
collected from the aforementioned source accessible to the
public must modify the data in the same sense as soon as
the source communicates the payment or termination of the
obligation, or within the following three days. If this is
not possible, they shall block the data of the respective
owner until the information is updated.
Violation of any of these obligations shall be known
and sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of
Article 16.

Title IV
Data processing by public bodies
Article 20.- The processing of personal data by a
public agency may only be carried out by
in respect of matters within its competence and subject
to the foregoing rules. Under these conditions, it
shall not require the consent of the owner.
Article 21.- The public bodies that submit to
processing personal data related to convictions for crimes,
administrative infractions or disciplinary offenses, may not
communicate them once the criminal or administrative action
has expired, or once the sanction or penalty has been served
or has expired.
Except in cases where such information is requested by
the courts of justice or other public bodies within the
scope of their competence, which shall keep such information
confidential or confidential.
The provisions of articles 5, 7, 11 and 18 shall be
applicable to them.
Article 22.- The Civil Registry and Identification
Service shall keep a registry of the personal data banks
in charge of public agencies.
This registry shall be public and shall contain, for
each of these data banks, the legal basis for their
existence, their purpose, the types of data stored and a
description of the universe of persons included, all of
which shall be defined in a regulation.
The public agency responsible for the data bank shall
provide this information to the Civil Registry and
Identification Service when the bank's activities begin,
and shall communicate any change in the elements indicated
in the preceding paragraph within fifteen days of its
occurrence.

Title V
Liability for violations of this law
Article 23.- The private natural or juridical
person or the public body responsible for the personal
data bank shall indemnify the patrimonial and moral
damage caused by the undue treatment of the data,
without prejudice to proceed to delete, modify or block
the data as requested by the owner or, as the case may
be, as ordered by the court.
The ensuing action may be brought jointly with the
claim aimed at establishing the infringement, without
prejudice to the provisions of Article 173 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. In any case, infringements not
contemplated in the articles
16 and 19, including compensation for damages, shall be
subject to the summary procedure. The judge shall take
all the measures he deems appropriate to make effective
the protection of the rights established by this law.
The evidence shall be evaluated in conscience by the
judge.
The amount of the indemnity will be established
prudentially by the judge, taking into consideration the
circumstances of the case and the seriousness of the facts.

Final Title
Article 24.- The following new second and third
paragraphs shall be added to Article 127 of the Sanitary
Code:
The medical prescriptions and analyses or
examinations of clinical laboratories and health-related
services are confidential. Their content may only be
disclosed or copies of them given with the express
written consent of the patient. Whoever unduly discloses
their contents, or infringes the provisions of the
following subsection, shall be punished in the manner
and with the penalties established in Book Ten.
The provisions of this article do not prevent
pharmacies from disclosing, for statistical purposes,
the sales of pharmaceutical products of any nature,
including the denomination and quantity thereof. In no
case shall the information provided by the pharmacies
include the name of the patients to whom the
prescriptions were issued, nor the names of the
physicians who issued them, nor any data that may be
used to identify them.
Transitional provisions
The provisions of this law, with the exception of
Article 22, shall enter into force within sixty days
from the date of its publication in the Official
Gazette.
The current registries or personal data banks of
public agencies shall be adjusted to the provisions of
this legal body, as of its entry into force.
The provisions of Article 22 shall come into force
one year after the publication of this law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the public agencies in
charge of personal data banks shall submit the
background information referred to in said provision in
advance, within the term set forth in the regulations.
Article 2°.- The owners of personal data registered in
data banks created prior to the entry into force of this law
shall have the rights conferred by this law.
Article 3°.- The norms that regulate the Commercial
Information Bulletin created by Supreme Decree of the
Treasury No. 950, of 1928, shall continue to be applied in
all that is not contrary to the provisions of this law.
Having complied with the provisions set forth in No. 1

Article 82 of the Political Constitution of the Republic
and inasmuch as I have had the good pleasure to approve
and sanction it; therefore be it promulgated and enacted
as a Law of the Republic.