Act No. 78-17 of 6 January 1978 on data processing data files and freedoms (France)



ACT No. 70-17 of 6 January 1978 on data-processing, data files and freedoms

After adoption by the National Assembly and the Senate the President of the Republic promulgates the following Act:

CHAPTER 1
PRINCIPLES AND DEFINITIONS
Article 1 - Data-processing shall be at the service of every
citizen.
It shall be developed in the context of international
co-operation. It shall not be prejudicial to human identity,
human rights, private life or individual or public freedoms.

Article 2 - No judicial decision entailing an appraisal of human
behaviour may be based on automatically processed data which
define the characteristics or personality of the person concerned.
No administrative or private decision entailing an appraisal
of human behaviour may be based solely on automatically processed
data which define the characteristics or personality of the per­
son concerned.

Article 3 - Everyone shall have the right to ascertain and
challenge the information and arguments used in automatic dataprocessing whose results are invoked against him.

Article 4 - For the purposes of this Act, the expression "personal
data" shall mean information which in any way whatever* directly
or otherwise, enables the natural persons to whom it applies to
be identified, whether the processing be carried out by a natural
person or by a legal person.

Article 5 - Hor the purposes of this Act* the expression "automatic
processing of personal data" shall mean any set of operations
carried out by automatic means, relating to the collection, recor­
ding, elaboration, alteration, storing and destruction of personal
data. and any set of operations of a similar nature relating to
the use of data files or data bases, notably the cross-referencing,
comparing, consultation or communication of personal data.

CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DATA-PROCESSING AND FREEDOMS

Article 6 - A National Committee on Data--Processing and Freedoms
shall be set up.
It shall ensure the application of the provisions
of this Act, notably by informing all persons concerned of their
rights and obligations, conferring with them and supervising the
uses made of the automatic techniques for the processing of per­
sonal data. To that end the committee may issue regulations in the
cases provided for in this Act.


Article 7 - The appropriations needed by the National Committee
for the performance of its functions shall be included in the
budget of the Ministry of Justice. The provisions of the
Financial Control Act of 10 August 1922 shall not be applicable
to the management thereof. The committee's accounts shall be
presented for scrutiny to the Auditing Office (Cour des Comptes).
However, expenditure entailed by the performance of some
of the formalities referred to in Articles 15, 16, 17 and 25 of
this Act may be subject to the charging of fees.

Article 8 - The National Committee on Data-Processing and Freedoms
shall be an independent administrative authority.

It shall comprise 17 members appointed for 5 years or for
the duration of their terms of office, viz;


- two Deputies and two Senators elected by the National Assembly
and the Senate respectively;

- two members of the Economic and Social Council, elected' by
that body;

- two members or former members of the Council of State,
one of whom shall have a rank at least equal to that of
"conseiller", elected by the General Assembly of the Council
of State;

- two members or former members of the Court of Cassation,
' one of whom shall have a rank at least equal to that of
"conseiller", elected by the General Assembly of the Court
of Cassation;

- two members or former members of the Auditing Office,
one of whom shall have a rank at least equal to that of
"conseiller-mattre", elected by the General Assembly of
the Auditing Office;

- two persons chosen for their knowledge of the applications
of data-processing, appointed by decree on a proposal by
the President of the National Assembly and the President
of the Senate respectively;

- three persons chosen for their authority and competence,
appointed by a Council of Ministers Decree.

The committee shall elect a chairman and two vice-chairmen
for five years.

The committee shall draw up its own rules of procedure.

In the event of a tie, the Chairman shall have a casting.

If the Chairman or a member of the committee ceases to
exercise his functions during his term of office, the term of
office of his successor shall be limited to the period remaining
to be completed.

Membership of the committee shall be incompatible with;

- membership of the government;

- the exercise of functions or the holding of shares in
companies participating in the manufacture of equipment
used in data-processing or telecommunications, or in the
supply of data-processing or telecommunications services.

- Any questions of incompatibility arising in regard to its
members shall be decided by the committee in each individual case.
Apart from resignation, the functions of a member may not be .
terminated unless his inability to attend the meetings of the com­
mittee is established by the committee in such manner as it shall
itself decide.

Article 9 - A government commissioner, appointed by the Prime
Minister, shall sit on the committee.
He may, within 10 days of a deliberation, call for a further
deliberation.

Article 10 - The committee shall have services directed by the
Chairman or, on his delegation and under his authority, by a
Vice-Chairman.
The committee may instruct the Chairman or the del-egated
Vice-Chairman to exercise its powers regarding the application of
Articles 16, 17 and 21 (4), (5) and (6).
The agents of the National Committee shall be appointed by
the Chairman or the delegated Vice-Chairman.

Article 11 - The committee may request the Appeals Court First
Presidents or the Administrative Tribunal Presidents to delegate
a judge under their authority, possibly assisted by experts, to
carry out investigations and inspections under its direction.

Article 12 - The members and agents of the committee shall be
bound by professional secrecy in respect of such facts, acts or
information as come to their knowledge by reason of their functions,
on the conditions laid down in Article 75 of the Criminal Code,
and, subject to whatever is necessary for the preparation of the
annual report provided for below, in Article 378 of the Criminal
Code.

Article 13 - In the exercise of their powers* the members of the
National Committee on Data-Processing and Freedoms and the mem­
bers of regional delegations shall not receive instructions from
any authority.
Data-processing experts called upon either to furnish
information to the committee or to give evidence before it
shall be discharged, as far as necessary, from their obliga­
tion to observe discretion.

CHAPTER III

FORMALITIES PRIOR TO THE AUTOMATIC PROCESSING OF DATA


Article 14 - The National Committee on Data-Processing and, _ '
Freedoms shall ensure that the public or private automatic pro­
cessing of personal data is carried out in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.

Article 15 - Apart from cases which have to be authorised., by, law,
any automatic processing of personal data carried out oh behalf
of the State,, a public establishment or a territorial authority,
or on behalf of a private corporation managing a public service
shall require authorisation by means of a statutory instrument
issued after the National Committee on Data-Processing and Freedoms
has submitted a reasoned opinion.
If the committee's opinion is unfavourable, the processing
may be effected only on the strength of a decree issued in the
light of a concurring opinion of the Council of State or, in the
case of a territorial authority, on the strength of a decision
by its deliberative body approved a decree issued in the light of
a concurring opinion of the Council of State.

If, after a period of two months which may be renewed once
only by a decision of the Chairman, the committee has not com­
- municated any opinion, its opinion shall be deemed favourable.

Article 16 - No automatic processing of personal data on behalf
of persons other than those subject to the provisions of Article 15 may be carried out until a declaration thereon has
been made to the National Committee on Data-Processing and Freedoms.
The declaration shall contain an assurance that the processing
satisfies the requirements of the Act.
As soon as he has received a receipt issued without delay by
the committee, the applicant may carry out the processing. He shall
not be exempt from any of his liabilities.

Article 17 - In the case of the commonest forms of public or
private data-processing which manifestly do not involve any
interference in privacy or freedoms, the National Committee on
Data-Processing and Freedoms shall draw up and publish simpli­
fied standards based on the specifications set out in Article 19.
In the case of data-processing satisfying these standards,
only a simplified declaration of compliance with one of these
standards shall be deposited with the committee. Unless the
latter takes a specific decision, a receipt for the declaration
shall be issued without delay. As soon as the receipt has been
received, the applicant may carry out the processing. He shall
not be exempt from any of his liabilities.

Article 18 - The use of the national register of natural persons
fgr the purpose of processing personal data shall be authorised
by a Council of State Decree issued after consultation of the
committee.

Article 19 - The request for an opinion or the declaration shall
specify:


- the person making the request and the person empowered to
decide on the introduction of the processing or, if he is
residing abroad, his representative in France;

- the characteristics, the purpose and, where appropriate,
the designation of the processings

- the department or departments responsible .for carrying
out the processing;

- the department to which the right of access defined in
Chapter V below applies and the measures taken to facilitate
the exercise of that right;

- the categories of persons who, because of their functions
or the exigencies of the service, have direct access to the
recorded data;

- the personal data processed, their origin and the duration
of their storage, as well as the persons or categories of
persons authorised to receive such data;

- any comparing, cross-referencing or other form of inter­
connecting to be effected with the data, as well as any
intention to assign them to third parties;

- the security measures taken with regard to the processing
and the data as well as in respect of secrets protected by
the law;

- whether the processing is to be carried out with a view to
personal data being transmitted between French territory
and abroad, in any form, including when rhe processing
entails operations partially carried out in French terri­
tory on the basis of operations carried out earlier outside'
France.

Any change.in the aforesaid particulars or any cancellation
of processing shall be reported to the committee.
Requests for opinions concerning the automatic processing
of personal data affecting State security, defence or public
safety need not include all the particulars listed above.


Article 20 - The statutory instrument provided for in respect of
data-processing covered by Article 15 above shall state inter alia!

- the designation and purpose of the data-processing;

- the department to which the right of access defined in
Chapter V below applies;

- the categories of personal data recorded and the persons
or categories of persons authorised to receive such data.

Council of State Decrees may stipulate that statutory instru­
ments concerning certain forms of data-processing affecting State
security, defence and public safety Shall not be published.

Article 21 - In the exercise of its supervisory function, the
committee:
1. shall take individual or general decisions in cases provided
for in this Act;

2. may, by a specific decision, instruct one or more of its
members or agents, assisted, where appropriate, by experts,
to make on-the-spot inspections in respect of any dataprocessing and to obtain any information and documents
necessary to the discharge of its functions;

3. shall iay down, where appropriate, model rules for ensuring
the security of systems; in the event of exceptional cir­
cumstances arising, it may prescribe security measures,
including the destruction of data media;

4. shall issue warnings to those concerned and report to the
Public Prosecutor's Office any offences which come to its
knowledge, in pursuance of Article 40 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure;

5. ensure that conditions governing the exercise of the right
of access and correction as laid down in the instruments
and declarations provided for in Articles 15 and 16 do not
hinder the free exercise of that right;

6. shall receive claims,, petitions and complaints;

7. shall keep itself informed of manufacturing and service
activities relating to automatic data-processing.

Ministers, public authorities, heads of public or private
companies, leaders of groups and, in more general terms, persons
holding or using personal data files may not obstruct the action
of the committee or its members for any reason whatsoever but
shall do all that is necessary to facilitate its task.

Article 22 - The committee shall place at the disposal of
the public a list of the various forms of data-processing, stating
in respect of each one:

- the statutory instrument authorising it to be carried out
or the date on which it was declared;

- its designation and purpose;

- the department to which the right of access provided for
in Chapter V below applies;

- the categories of personal data recorded and the persons
or categories of persons authorised to receive such data.

Decisions, opinions or recommendations of the committee,
a knowledge of which is relevant to the application or interpreta­
tion of this Act shall be placed at the disposal of the public
in the manner laid down by decree.

Article 23 - The committee shall submit an annual report to the
President of the Republic and to parliament on the execution of
its mission. The report shall be published.

The report shall, inter alia, describe the procedures and
working methods used by the committee and contain, in an appendix,
all information concerning the organisation of the committee and
its services that is likely to facilitate the public's relations
with the committee.

Article 24 - On a proposal or following an opinion by the com­
mittee, the transmission between French territory and abroad, in
any form whatever, of personal data that have been subjected to
a form of automatic processing governed by Article 16 above may
be subjected to prior authorisation or regulated in a manner speci
fied in a Council of State Decree with a view to ensuring com­
pliance with the principles laid down in this Act.


CHAPTER IV
COLLECTION, RECORDING AND STORAGE OP PERSONAL DATA

Article 25 - The collection of data by any fraudulent, unfair
or unlawful means shall be prohibited.

Article 26 - Any natural person may object for legitimate reasons
to the processing of personal data concerning him.
This righc shall not apply to the forms of processing speci­
fied in the statutory instrument provided for in Article 15.

Article 27 - Persons from whom personal data are obtained shall be
informed of:
- the compulsory or optional nature of replies;

- the consequences for them of any failure to reply;

- the identities of the natural or legal persons for whom
the data are intended;

- the existence of a right of access and correction.

Where such data are collected by means of questionnaires,
the above requirements shall be stated on the questionnaires.
These provisions shall not apply to the collection of infor­
mation required for the establishment of offences.

Article 28 - Except where otherwise provided by law, data shall
not be stored in a personal form for longer than the period speci­
fied in the request for an opinion or the declaration, unless the
storing thereof is authorised by the committee.

Article 29 - Any person ordering or carrying out the processing
of personal data shall ipso facto undertake, in respect of the
persons concerned, to take all necessary precautions in order to
ensure the security of the data and, in particular, to prevent
them from being distorted, damaged or communicated to unauthorised
third parties.

Article 30 - Except where otherwise provided by law, courts and
public authorities acting in pursuance of their statutory powers
and, subject to a concurring opinion of the National Committee,
legal persons managing a public service shall be the only bodies
authorised to process personal data concerning offences, convic­
tions or.security measures.


Pending the introduction of the register of drivers pro­
vided for in Act No. 70-539 of 24 June 1970, insurance com­
panies may, under the committee's supervision, themselves pro­
cess the data referred to in Article 5 of the aforesaid Act
concerning the persons specified in the last paragraph of the
same article.

Article 31 - Without the express agreement of the person concerned,
it shall be prohibited to place or store in a computer memory per­
sonal data which directly or indirectly reveal the racial origins
or political, philosophical, religious opinions or trade union
affiliations of the persons to which they relate.
However, churches and religious, philosophical, political
or trade union groups may keep an automated register of their
members or correspondents. They shall not be subject to any
supervision on that account.
Exceptions to the above prohibition may also be made by a
Council of State Decree for reasons of public interest, on the
basis of a proposal or a concurring opinion of the committee.

Article 32 - The electoral register shall be equally available for
consultation by candidates and political parties, under the super­
vision of the electoral information boards.

Article 33 - The provisions of Articles 24, 30 and 31 shall not
apply to personal data processed by bodies of the printed or
audio-visual press in pursuance of the Acts governing them and in
cases where the effect of the application of those provisions
would be to restrict the exercise of freedom of expression.

CHAPTER V
EXERCISE OP THE RIGHT OP ACCESS

Article 34 - Anyone furnishing evidence of his identity shall have
the right to question the departments or agencies responsible for
carrying out the various forms of automatic data-processing, a
list of which shall be available to the public in application of
Article 22 above, with a view to ascertaining whether the personal
data being processed concern him and, where appropriate, having the
data communicated to him.

Article 35 - Any person having right of access may have the data
concerning him communicated to him. The data shall be communica­
ted in clear and shall correspond with those recorded.


Upon receipt of a copy-of data, the person having right of
access who requested it shall pay a fixed fee the amount of which,
varying according to the form of processing, shall he determined
by the committee and approved by the Minister of Economics and
Finance. .
However, if the officer in charge of the data file lodges
an objection with the committee, the committee may grant him;

-a certain period in.which to replyj

- permission not to heed certain requests which are mani­
festly abusive by virtue' of their numerousness or repetitiveness

If there is reason to fear the concealment or disappearance
of the data referred to in the first paragraph of this article,
and even before the lodging of a judicial appeal, the competent
judge may be asked to order any measures calculated to prevent '
such concealment or disappearance.

Article 36 - Any person having right of access may demand that data
concerning him which are inaccurate, incomplete, ambiguous or
out of date or the collection, use, communication or storing of
which is prohibited be corrected, completed, clarified, updated
or obliterated.
If the person concerned so requests, the department or body
concerned shall issue free of charge a copy of the recorded data'
as amended.

In the event of a dispute, onus of proof shall rest with the
department concerned, unless it is established that the data in
dispute were' communicated by the person concerned or with his consent
If a person having right of access succeeds in having the
recorded data amended, the fee charged in application of Article 35
shall be reimbursed.

Article 37 - A personal data file shall be supplemented or corrected, even "proprio motu," if the body holding it learns of
the inaccuracy or incompleteness of any data contained therein.

Article 38 - If data have been communicated to a third party,
the latter shall be notified of their correction or cancellation
unless exemption Is granted by the committee.

Article 39 - In the case of the processing of data affecting
State security, defence and public safety, the request shall be
addressed to the committee, which shall designate one of its .
members belonging or having belonged to the Council of State,
the Court of Cassation or the Auditing Office to conduct such
investigations and arrange for such, alterations as may be necessary. The member may be assisted by an -agent of the committee.


The applicant shall be notified that verifications have been
made.

Article 40 - If the exercise of the right of access applies to
medical data, these may not be communicated to the person con­
cerned except through a doctor designated by him for that purpose.

CHAPTER VI
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 41 - Anyone who has carried out* or caused to be carried
out, any automatic processing of personal data without the statu­
tory instruments provided for in Article 15 having been published
or the declarations provided for in Article 16 having been made
shall be liable to a term of imprisonment ranging from 6 months to
5 years and a fine ranging from 2,000 to 200,000 francs or to one
of these two penalties only.

Furthermore, the court may order that all or part of its
judgement be published in one or more newspapers and publicly
displayed in whatever manner it specifies* at the expense of the
person convicted.

Article 42 - Anyone who has recorded or caused to be recorded,
stored or caused to be stored personal data* in violation of
Articles 25, 26 and 23-pl shall be liable to a term of imprison­
ment ranging from 1 to 5 years and a fine ranging from 20,000 to
2,000,000 francs or to one of tnese two penalties only.

Furthermore, the court may order that all or part of its
judgement be published in one or more newspapers and publicly
displayed in whatever manner it specifies, at the expense of the
person convicted.

Article 43 - Anyone who has acquired, in the course of their being
recorded, classified, transmitted or subjected to any other form
of processing, personal data whose disclosure would result in the
reputation or standing of the person concerned being harmed or his
privacy invaded and who has wittingly and without the authorisation
of that person brought such data to the knowledge of someone who
is not qualified to receive them under the provisions of this Act
or other legislative provisions shall be liable to a term of
imprisonment ranging from 2 to 6 months and a fine ranging from
2,000 to 20,000 francs or to one of these penalties only.
Anyone who, through imprudence or negligence, has divulged
or caused to be divulged data of the kind referred to in the pre­
ceding paragraph shall be liable to a fine ranging from 2,000 to
20,000 francs.


Article 44 - Anyone who has held personal data in the course
of their being recorded, classified, transmitted or subjec­
ted to any other form of processing and who has used them for
a purpose other than that specified in the statutory instrument
provided for in Article 15 above or in a declaration made in
application of Articles lb and 17 or in a legislative provision
shall be liable to a term of imprisonment ranging from 1 to 5 years
and a fine ranging from 20,000 to 2,000,000 francs.

CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Article 45 - The provisions of Articles 25, 27, 29, 50, 31, 32
and 33 concerning the collection, recording and storing of per­
sonal data shall be applicable to non-automatic or mechanised
data files other than those used as part of the strict exercise
of the right to privacy.
The first paragraph of Article 26 shall be applicable to
the same data files, apart from public data files designated
by a statutory instrument.
Any person furnishing evidence of his identity shall have
the right to question departments or bodies holding data files
of the kind referred to in the first paragraph of this article
with a view to establishing whether they contain any personal
data concerning him. A person having right of access shall have
the right to have such data communicated to himj he may demand
that the first three paragraphs of Article
of this Act, concerning the right of correction, be applied. The provisions of
Articles 37, 38, 39 and 40 shall also be applicable. A Council
of State Decree shall lay down conditions for the exercise of the
right of access and correction.
It may provide for the charging
of fees for the issue of copies of data communicated.

On a proposal by the National Committee on Data-Processing
and Freedoms, the government' may decide, by a Council of State
Decree, that the other provisions of this Act may, in whole or
in part, apply to a non-automatic or mechanical data file or to
categories of such data files which, either on their own or in
conjunction with a computerised data file, entail dangers for
the protection of freedoms.

Article 46 - Council of State Decrees shall lay down
arrangements for the application of this Act. They shall be
issued within 6 months of the promulgation of the Act.
The decrees shall stipulate the period within which the
provisions of this Act shall enter into force. This period shall
not exceed 2 years from the promulgation of the Act.

Article 47 - This Act shall be applicable to Mayotte and the
overseas territories.

Article 48 - As a transitional measure, forms of data-processing
governed by Article 15 above which have already been introduced
shall be subject only to a declaration to the National Committee
on Data-Processing and Freedoms on the conditions prescribed in
Articles 16 and 17.
However, the committee may, by a specific decision, apply
the provisions of Article 15 and fix the period within which
the statutory instrument governing the data-processing shall be
issued.
After a period of 2 years from the promulgation of this Act,
all forms of data-processing governed by Article 15 shall be
required to conform with the requirements of that article.
