
LAW May 23, 1995 No. 70 (published June 1, 1 995)
REFORM OF LAW MARCH 1, 1983 NO. 27 REGULATING
COMPUTERIZED COLLECTION OF PERSONAL DATA

CHAPTEr
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Art. 1
(Scope of application)
Any application in the field of information technology, which implies the establishment or use in
the territory of San Marino of magnetic or otherwise automized archives containing data named or
in any way referring to clearly identifiable legal entities, by the State, Public Entities or natural or
legal persons, is subject to the requirements of this law.
Art. 2
(Purpose)
The computer applications referred to in Article 1 have the primary function of a service for the
benefit of all citizens. Therefore, they shall in no way prejudice respect for human rights and
fundamental individual and public freedoms, nor shall they undermine the dignity and identity of
the human person, whose privacy isinviolable.
Art. 3
(Definitions)
For the purpose of the application of this law, the terms below shall have the following meanings:
a) named or personal data: all information relating to identified or otherwise clearly
identifiable natural or legal persons;
b) databases or magnetic archives: all collections of information recorded on special computer
media;
c) Third party: any person other than the owner or manager of the database.
Art. 4
(Guarantees)
Natural or legal persons are protected against the misuse of personal data when such data:
a) Are collected as part of computer applications and programs;
b) Are recorded on appropriate informaitci media;
c) Are subject to self-motivated processing and treatment;
d) are subject, individually or globally or synthetically, to sorting, evaluation or transmission to
private or public entities.
Except in cases expressly provided for by law, no judicial or administrative measure involving an
appreciation of the individual behavior of citizens may be based solely on the computer processing
of d a t d i f r o m which a profile of the personality of the person concerned may emerge.
Any natural or juridical person has the right to co nsider and challenge, for possible rectification,
data and information collected, processed, and used in computer applications, the results of which
are affixed to him or her or concern him or her personally.
Any entity or person proceeding to the collection,processing or use of nominative data is obliged, in
addition to respecting the obligation of professional secrecy, to take all necessary precautionary
measures for the purpose of preserving the security and confidentiality of the information and, in
particular, to prevent it from being deformed, tampered with or brought to the attention of
unauthorized persons. Disclosure of the same is permissible with the consent of the person
concerned or if it is data from public records, acts or documents knowable by all.
The transfer out of the territory of data concerning San Marino natural or legal persons is subject
to the prior and reasoned authorization of the Guarantor referred to in Article 15.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT AND USE OF DATABASES
Art. 5
(Databases of the State and Public Bodies)
The automated collection, processing and use of personal data by the State and Public Entities
are permitted only in the event of the establishment, by specific regential decree, of a special
State database in the territory of San Marino, which shall be issued after obtaining the opinion
of the Guarantor referred to in Article 15.
Art. 6
(Private databases)
The collection, processing, and automated use of named data with related purposes by private
individuals or legal entities shall be subject to the prior authorization of the State Congress and
the Supervisor referred to in Article 15, who shall decide in this matter by reasoned resolutions.
The procedural modalities pertaining to the application for and issuance of individual
authorizations will be defined by the regental decree referred to in Article 5, which will also
regulate the establishment, at the Secretariat of State for Internal Affairs, of a special directory of
authorized databases.
Political, social and cultural organizations t h a t intend to collect, process or use personal data
concerning their members and pertaining to their specific purposes with the help of automated
databases or archives that are not beyond the control of the members themselves, but whose data
cannot be brought to the knowledge of third parties, must notify the Guarantor referred to in
Article 15 for acknowledgement and registration in the register referred to in the preceding
paragraph.
Authorization from the State Congress and the Supervisor is not required when processing:
a) relates to data held under a legal obligation;
b) Is necessary for the performance of obligations under a contract to which the interested party is a
party;to
c) concerns data from public records, lists, acts or documents that are knowable by anyone.
CHAPTER III
REGULATION OF DATA COLLECTION
Art. 7
(Prohibitions)
The collection of data performed by use of fraudulent, illegal or unfair means is prohibited. It is also
forbidden to collect, process, or use data, where not esprsesely permitted by the individuals
concerned or by the statutes of individual Bodies or Associations, relating to political, trade union, or
religious opinions or activities.
In any case, the collection, processing or use of personal data pertaining to the sphere of intimate
private life is prohibited.
Art. 8
(Prescriptions)
Anyone asked to collectpersonal data for computer applications must be made aware:
a) Of the purposes pursued by data collection;
b) Of the compulsory or optional character of irsposts;
c) Of the consequences, with respect to themselves, of any failure to respond;
d) of the destination of the information collected, which may be public, confidential, or extended
to well-identified third parties;
e) of the existence of the right, guaranteed by law,to access and rectify the data collected.
If the data collection is done with the help of questionnaires, the questionnaires should expressly
state the above requirements.
These requirements do not apply to the collection of data and information performed as part of the
investigation of criminal or administrative offenses i.
Art. 9
(Confidential Databases)
The collection and processing of data intended for the State and the com petent public agencies
that hold exclusive ownership thereof are reserved for the State within the framework of the laws
and regulations in force and in accordance with the modalities established by the Regimental
Decree referred to in Article 5:
a) to the keeping and updating of the registry and electoral files of the entire resident
population and of all San Marino citizens residing abroad;
b) To the keeping and updating of criminal records;
c) To the keeping and updating of atitnent records of the health and tax registers of the
population.
CHAPTE
R IV
RIGHT OF ACCESS AND RECTIFICATION
Art. 10
(Access to the national directory)
Any person, on the basis of an appropriate request in signed cartalegal and addressed to the
Guarantor, may ascertain whether the databases entered in the directoryreferred to in Article 6 or
those managed by the State and Public Entities have collected or processed personal data
concerning him personally.
Art. 11
(Access to databases)
Each person may obtain copies of data and information concerning him or her personally under the
following conditions:
a) That the application, on legal paper, be signed by the same owner or his legal representative
be in each case accompanied by the details of a valid personal identity document;
b) That the information collected is not found to be protected by law by absolute secrecy.
The right of access to health information may be exercised only by trmaite ofa physician employed
by or contracted with the Social Security Instiut to, whose name shall be indicated in the
application; it is within the physician's authority to disclose all or only part of the information to
the patient.
Access to the voter file is allowed unconditional full equality to all political parties under the
supervision of the Election Commission, which may delegate this task to the Chief Electoral Officer.
Art. 12
(Right of Rectification)
The holder of the right of access has the right to request, by means of an application on legal paper
addressed to the Guarantor, that data and information concerning him personally that are
inaccurate, incomplete, equivocal, out of date, or the collection, processing, transmission or
storage of which is prohibited be corrected, supplemented, clarified, updated or eliminated.
In the same application, the person concerned may request irlissue of a transcript of the corrected
data, which is then forwarded to him or her free of charge.
If the erroneous information has been brought to the knowledge of third parties, they should also
be notified of the rectification or cancellation.
Art. 13
(Further Findings)
Anyone who has, in the exercise of the right of access, serious reasons to doubt that the data
brought to his knowledge are not in accordance with those collected and processed, may send a
written report, on legal paper, to the Guarantor.
The Guarantor, who is required to provide a response enrto sixty days from the receipt of the
request, may carry out, if deemed necessary, appropriate administrative inadgini or request the
intervention of the Judiciary.
Art. 14
(Ex officio correction)
A personal data file must be rectified, supplemented or updated ex officio when the Entity or the
person managing it becomes aware of the inaccuracy or incompleteness of the data collected or
processed. Notification of the rectification, supplementation or updating of personal data must be
given free of charge to the direct interestsia.
CHAPTER V
DATA PRIVACY GUARANTOR PERSONAL
Art. 15
(Guarantor for the Protection of Personal Data Privacy)
A Magistrate of the Administrative Court indicated by the Pro-Tempore Executive assumes the
function of Data Protection Supervisor referred to in this Law and Law No. 71 of 23/05/1995
"Discipline of the Collection of Statistical Data and Public Information Technology Expertise." In
carrying out his activities, he shall rely on the support of the administrative apparatus of the Court
Registry and the Data Processing and Statistics Center of the Economic Planning Office.
Acts pertaining to it, affecting the activity of the Public Administration and related or agreed
activities, shall be notified to the political autoirty and adopted through the prescribed hierarchical
ways.
Appeals against the decisions of the Guarantor may be made to the Administrative Court, which will
proceed without entrusting the judgment to the judge who es plete functions of the Guarantor.
The Supervisor is appointed for a term of three years.
Art. 16
(Functions of the Guarantor)
In particular, it is the responsibility of the Guarantor:
a) Issue mandatory opinion about applications for authorization of private databases;
b) Ensure that public and private databases strictly adhere to legal compliance;
c) To examine complaints brought by any natural or legal person concerning the application of
this Law and in any case where there is a violation of the confidentiality of personal data collected
by the State or private parties for computer or statistical purposes and to decide on the same in
the first instance, without prejudice to the right of recourse to the ordi nary or administrative
jurisdiction in the prescribed forms;
d) To formulate mandatory opinions about decrees and regulations to be issued in
application of this law also with reference to the inmatter constraints arising from
international agreements and conventions;
e) Report all detected infractions to the Judicial Authority;
f) Authorize access to database information by Entities, Offices and persons who do not have the
right of access;
g) To express a binding opinion for the issuance by the IT authority under Law No. 71 of
23/05/1995 of regulatory rules for d i s t i b r uction of data to third parties;
h) Issue regulations on the degrees of confidentiality of personal data referred to in this Law and
the special protection to be given to some of them, confidentiality to which all those who have
availability of the data for institutional, managerial or concessionary reasons are bound.

CHAPTER VI
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Art. 17
(Infractions and criminal penalties)
Anyone who creates, operates or uses a database without the prescribed prior authorization
referred to in Article 6, first paragraph, shall be punished by a finea days.
Whoever, during the collection or processing of personal data, makes or permits its distorted use in
relation to the purposes established by the law or the decree referred to in Article 5 or resulting
from the authorization referred to in Article 6, first paragraph, shall be punished by arrest or a fine of
daily.i
Any person who uses fraudulent means to gain access to information that is confidential to the
holders of the right of access shall be punished by imprisonment for three months or fined for
days.
Anyone who has collected or caused to be collected, recorded or caused to be recorded, stored or
caused to be stored personal data in violation of the provisions stipulated in Articles 7, 8 and 9 shall
be punished by a fine of days.
The acts referred to in the preceding paragraphs shall be punished by imprisonment in the first
degree or by a fine of days in the third degree if they were committed to procure for oneself or
others an advantage or to cause harm to others.
Anyone who obstructs or prevents without justifiable reason the right of access or rectification
referred to in Articles 10, 11, 12, 13, shall be punished by imprisonment or a fine of days in I
degree.
In the cases referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the Judge may also impose a 1st degree
disqualification on the operator engaged in the collection, processing or use of data.
However, this is without prejudice to the more serious penalties provided for the same acts by the
Penal Code or other laws of the state.
Art. 18
(Administrative Penalties)
In the event of conviction for any of the offenses referred to in the preceding article, the State
Congress may suspend the authorization referred to in Article 6, first paragraph, for a maximum
time of three months.
In case of recidivism or continuation, the suspension referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be
immediately ordered by the State Congress.
In case of further recidivism, the State Congress shall without fail order the revocation of the
authorization.
CHAPTER VII
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Art. 19
(Amnesty)
Owners, operators or users of databases whose conditions already existed on the date of the
entry into force of the foregoing law are required to adapt to the new provisions of the law
within a maximum period of one year.
Art. 20
(Correlation with previous regulations)
This law replaces Law No. 27 of 1983 and repeals any other conflicting regulations.
Royal Decrees No. 27 of 1984, No. 67 of 1986 and No. 140 of 1987, which were issued in
implementation of the law replaced by this one, remain intact insofar as they are compatible with
the new regulations.
Art. 21
(Entry into force)
This law shall enter into force on the fifth day following its legal publication.