                              Data Protection

BELIZE:

                     DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2021

                     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

                                 PART I

                                Preliminary

1. Short title.

2. Interpretation.
3. Application of Act.

                                 PART II

                         Data Protection Principles

4. Principles relating to processing of personal data.

5. Duty of data controller to comply with principles.

6. Fairness of processing.		

7. Lawfulness of processing.

8. Conditions for consent.

9. Conditions applicable to child’s consent.

10. Processing of sensitive personal data.

                                 PART III

                          Rights of a Data Subject

11. Right of access.
                               Data Protection

12. Right to rectification.

13. Right to erasure.

14. Right to restriction of processing.

15. Notification regarding rectification or erasure of personal data or
    restriction of processing of personal data.

16. Right to data portability.

17. Right to prevent processing likely to cause damage or distress.

18. Right to prevent processing for purposes of direct marketing.

19. Automated individual decision-making, including profiling.

20. Information to be provided where personal data is collected from the
    data subject.

21. Information to be provided where personal data has not been obtained
    from the data subject.
22. Transparent information, communication and modalities for the exercise
    of the rights of the data subject.

                                 PART IV

               Transfers of Personal Data outside of Belize

23. General principle for transfers.

24. Adequate level of protection.

25. Appropriate safeguards.

26. Binding corporate rules.

27. Derogations.
                               Data Protection

28. Non-compliance.

29. Substantial public interest.

                                   PART V

                                Exemptions

30. References to subject information provisions and non-disclosure
    provisions.

31. National Security.

32. Crime and taxation.

33. Health, education and social work.

34. Regulatory activity.

35. Journalism, literature and art.

36. Research, history and statistics.

37. Manual data held by public authorities.

38. Information available to the public by or under enactment.

39. Disclosures required by law or made in connection with legal
    proceedings.

40. Parliamentary privilege.

41. Legal professional privilege.

42. Domestic purposes.

43. Confidential references given by the data controller.

44. Armed forces.
                              Data Protection

45. Judicial appointments and honours.

46. Appointments to public service.

47. Corporate finance.

48. Negotiations with data subject.

49. Examinations.
50. Powers to make further exemptions by order.

                                 PART VI

                               Data Sharing

51. Agencies to share information.
52. Relationship between this Part and other law relating to data disclosure.


                                PART VII

                   Data Controller and Data Processor

53. Compliance.

54. Responsibility of the data controller.

55. Data protection by design and by default.

56. Data processor.

57. Processing under the authority of the data controller or data processor.

58. Records of processing activities.

59. Cooperation with the Commissioner.

60. Security of processing.
                              Data Protection

61. Notification of a personal data breach to the Commissioner.

62. Communication of a personal data breach to the data subject.

63. Data protection impact assessment.

64. Prior consultation.

65. Designation of the data privacy officer.

66. Position of the data privacy officer.

67. Duties and functions of a data privacy officer.

                                PART VIII

                     Data Protection Commissioner

68. Data Protection Commissioner.

69. Functions of Commissioner.

70. Staff.

71. Confidential information.

72. Indemnity.
73. Report.

                                 PART IX

                                Enforcement

74. Enforcement notice.

75. Cancellation or variation of Enforcement Notice.

76. Request for assessment.
                              Data Protection

77. Information notice.

78. Special Information Notice.

79. Determination by Commissioner as to the purposes of journalism or
    artistic or literary purposes.

80. Restriction on enforcement in case of processing for the purposes of
    journalism or for artistic or literary purposes.

81. Failure to comply with notice.

82. Service of notice by Commissioner.

83. Warrants.

84. Execution of warrants.

85. Matters exempt from inspection and seizure.

86. Return of warrants.

87. Obstruction of execution of a warrant.

                                 PART X

                          Data Protection Tribunal

88. Establishment of the Data Protection Tribunal.

89. Right of appeal.

90. Determination of appeals.

                                 PART XI

                               Miscellaneous

91. Right to compensation and liability.
                            Data Protection

92. Unlawful obtaining of personal data.

93. Disclosure of information.

94. Act binds Crown.

95. Amendment of Schedule.

96. Regulations.

97. Commencement.






                        No. 45 of 2021

                                         I assent,

                           (H.E. MS. FROYLA TZALAM)
                                  Governor-General

                                  29th November 2021


AN ACT to regulate the collection, keeping, use and
  dissemination of personal data; to protect the privacy
  of individuals in relation to their personal data; and to
  provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
  thereto.

                         (Gazetted 30th November, 2021).

BE IT ENACTED, by and with the advice and consent of
   the House of Representatives and Senate of Belize and
   by the authority of the same, as follows:

                         PART I

                       Preliminary

1. This Act may be cited as the                               Short title.



              DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2021.

   2. In this Act–

                  “accessible public record” means any record that is kept by
                  a public authority and to which members of the public are
                  given access;

                  “accessible record” means–

                          (a) a health record;

                          (b) an educational record; or

                          (c) an accessible public record;

                  “biometric data” means personal data resulting from specific
                  technical processing relating to the physical, physiological
                  or behavioural characteristics of an individual, which allow
                  or confirm the unique identification of that individual;

                  “child” means a person who is under the age of 16 years;

                  “Commissioner” means the Data Protection Commissioner
                  referred to in section 68;

                  “consent” in relation to a data subject means any freely given,
                  specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data
                  subject’s wishes by which the data subject, by a statement
                  or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the
                  processing of personal data relating to him;

                  “data” means information that–

                          (a) is being processed by means of equipment
                              operating automatically in response to
                              instructions given for that purpose;

                          (b) is recorded with the intention that it should be
                              processed by means of such equipment;


          (c) is recorded as part of a relevant filing system
              or with the intention that it should form part of
              a relevant filing system;

          (d) does not fall within paragraph (a), (b) or (c) but
              forms part of an accessible record; or

          (e) does not fall within paragraph (a), (b), (c) or
              (d) but is recorded information held by a public
              authority;

“data controller” means–

          (a) a person who alone, jointly or in common with
              others determines the purposes for which, and
              the manner in which, any personal data is or
              should be processed; or

          (b) where personal data is processed only for the
              purpose for which the data is required by or
              under an enactment to be processed, the person
              on whom the obligation to process the data is
              imposed by or under an enactment;

“data privacy officer” means a person designated as such
pursuant to section 65;

“data processor” means any person, other than an employee
of a data controller, who processes personal data on behalf
of the data controller;

“data subject” means an individual who is the subject of
personal data;

“genetic data” means personal data relating to the inherited
or acquired genetic characteristics of an individual which
gives unique information about the physiology or the health
of that individual and which result, in particular, from an
analysis of a biological sample from the individual;


      “group of undertakings” means a controlling undertaking
      and its controlled undertaking;

      “health care professional” includes a person who is registered
      under any health care provider legislation;

      “health record” means any record which–

              (a) consists of information relating to the physical
                  or mental condition of an individual; and

              (b) has been made by or on behalf of a health care
                  professional in connection with the care of the
                  individual;

      “Minister” means the Minister responsible for digital
      transformation, e-governance or information technology;

      “personal data” means data which relates to an individual
      who can be identified–

              (a) from that data; or

              (b) from that data together with other information
                  which is in the possession of, or is likely to
                  come into the possession of, the data controller;

      “personal data breach” means a breach of security leading
      to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration,
      unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data
      transmitted, stored or otherwise processed;

      “process” in relation to information or data, means to obtain,
      record or hold the information or data or carry out any
      operation or set of operations on the information or data,
      including the–

              (a) organization, adaptation or alteration of the
                  information or data;


          (b) retrieval, consultation or use of the information
              or data;

“restriction of processing of personal data” means the
marking of stored personal data with the aim of limiting their
processing in the future;

“sensitive personal data” means personal data consisting of
information on a data subject’s–

          (a) racial or ethnic origin;

          (b) political opinions;

          (c) religious beliefs or other beliefs of a similar
              nature;

          (d) membership of a political body;

          (e) membership of a trade union;

          (f) genetic data;

          (g) biometric data;

          (h) sexual orientation or sexual life;

          (i) financial record or position;

          (j) criminal record; or

          (k) proceedings for any offence committed or alleged
              to have been committed by him, the disposal of
              such proceedings or the sentence of any court
              of competent jurisdiction in such proceedings;

“small business” means a business at a time (the test time)
in a financial year (the current year) if its annual turnover
for the previous financial year is $3,000,000 or less;

CAP. 300.        “trade union” has the meaning assigned to it under section
                 2 of the Trade Unions Act;

                 “Tribunal” means the Data Protection Tribunal established
                 under section 88.

Application of   3.–(1) This Act applies to–
Act.

                         (a) the processing of personal data in the context
                             of the activities of a data controller or a data
                             processor established in Belize; and

                         (b) the processing of personal data of data subjects
                             in Belize by a data controller or a data processor
                             not established in Belize, where the processing
                             activities are related to the offering of goods or
                             services to data subjects in Belize.

                    (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) a data controller or
                 data processor is established in Belize if that data controller
                 or data processor is–

                         (a) an individual who is ordinarily resident in Belize;

                         (b) a body, association or other entity incorporated,
                             organised, registered or otherwise formed under
                             the laws of Belize; or

                         (c) a person who does not fall within paragraph (a)
                             or (b) but maintains in Belize an office, branch or
                             agency through which he carries on any activity
                             related to the processing of personal data.

                    (3) Notwithstanding sub-sections (1) and (2), small
                 businesses are exempted from the application of this Act
                 except for a small business–

                         (a)   providing health service;


          (b) trading in personal information;

          (c) an operator of a residential tenancy database;

          (d) a credit reporting body;

          (e) a reporting entity for the purposes of the Money
              Laundering and Terrorism (Prevention) Act;           Cap. 104.



          (f) employee associations registered or recognised
              under any enactment in Belize;

          (g) a business prescribed by under regulations made
              under this Act;

          (h) a business that has opted in to be covered by
              this Act.

                           PART II

                  Data Protection Principles

4.–(1) Personal data shall be–                                     Principles
                                                                   relating to
                                                                   processing of
          (a) processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent      personal data.

              manner in relation to the data subject;

          (b) collected for specified, explicit and legitimate
              purposes and shall not be further processed in a
              manner that is incompatible with those purposes;

          (c) adequate, relevant and limited to what is
              necessary in relation to the purposes for which
              they are processed;

          (d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date
              and reasonable steps shall be taken to ensure that


                              personal data that is inaccurate, having regard
                              to the purposes for which they are processed,
                              are erased or rectified without delay;

                        (e) kept in a form which permits identification of
                            data subjects for no longer than is necessary
                            for the purposes for which the personal data is
                            processed; and

                        (f) processed in a manner that ensures appropriate
                            security of the personal data, including protection
                            against unauthorised or unlawful processing and
                            against accidental loss, destruction or damage,
                            using appropriate technical or organisational
                            measures.

                    (2) In determining whether any disclosure of personal data
                is compatible with the purpose for which the data is obtained
                in accordance with sub-section (1)(b), regard shall be had
                to the purpose for which the personal data is intended to be
                processed by any person to whom the data is disclosed.

                    (3) Pursuant to sub-section (1)(f), having regard to the state
                of technological development and the cost of implementing
                any measures, the measures must ensure a level of security
                appropriate to–

                        (a) the harm that might result from such unauthorised
                            or unlawful processing or accidental loss,
                            destruction or damage; and

                        (b) the nature of the data to be protected.

Duty of data    5.–(1) A data controller shall, in relation to all of the personal
controller to
comply with
                data he processes, comply with the principles under section
principles.     4 and where requested by the Commissioner, demonstrate
                compliance with those principles.


   (2) A data controller may specify the purpose for which
personal data is obtained pursuant to section 4(1)(b)–

          (a) in any information given for the purposes of
              section 6(3)(a) by the data controller to the data
              subject; or

          (b) in a notification given to the Commissioner
              under Part III.

   (3) Section 4 (1)(d) is not contravened by reason of
any inaccuracy in personal data which accurately record
information obtained by the data controller from the data
subject or a third party in a case where–

          (a) having regard to the purpose for which the data
              was obtained and further processed, the data
              controller has taken reasonable steps to ensure
              the accuracy of the data; and

          (b) the data subject has notified the data controller of
              the data subject’s view that the data is inaccurate
              and the data indicates that fact.

   (4) A data controller shall take reasonable steps to ensure
that his employees who have access to the personal data
comply with the principles set out in section 4(1).

   (5) Pursuant to section 4 (1)(f), where processing of
personal data is carried out by a data processor on behalf
of a data controller, the data controller shall–

          (a) choose a data processor who provides sufficient
              guarantees in respect of the technical and
              organisational security measures governing the
              processing to be carried out; and

          (b) take reasonable steps to ensure compliance with
              the measures referred to in paragraph (a).


                  (6) Where processing of personal data is carried out by
              a data processor on behalf of a data controller, the data
              controller is not to be regarded as complying with section 4
              (1)(f) unless–

                      (a) the processing is carried out under a contract–

                            (i)    which is made or evidenced in writing;
                                   and

                            (ii)   under which the data processor is to
                                   act only on instructions from the data
                                   controller; and

                      (b) the contract requires the data processor to comply
                          with obligations equivalent to those imposed on
                          a data controller by section 4 (1)(f).

                  (7) A person who fails to comply with the requirements
              set out under sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable
              on summary conviction to a fine of five hundred thousand
              dollars or to imprisonment for three years or to both such
              fine and term of imprisonment.

Fairness of
processing.
              6.–(1) In determining whether personal data is processed
              fairly in accordance with section 4 (1)(a), regard shall be had
              to the method by which it is obtained, including in particular
              whether any person from whom the personal data is obtained
              is deceived or misled as to the purpose for which the personal
              data is to be processed.

                  (2) Subject to sub-section (3), personal data shall be treated
              as having been obtained fairly if the personal data consists
              of information obtained from a person who is–

                      (a) authorised by or under any enactment to supply
                          the data; or


          (b) required to supply by the data any convention
              or other instrument imposing an international
              obligation on Belize.

   (3) Personal data shall not to be treated as processed fairly
unless–

          (a) in the case of data obtained from the data subject,
              the data controller ensures so far as practicable
              that the data subject has, is provided with, or
              has readily available to him, the following
              information–

               (i)     the identity of the data controller;

               (ii)    where a data controller has nominated
                       a representative for the purposes of this
                       Act, the identity of that representative;

               (iii)   the purpose for which the data is intended
                       to be processed; and

               (iv)    any further information which is
                       necessary, having regard to the specific
                       circumstances in which the data is or is
                       to be processed, to enable processing in
                       respect of the data subject to be fair; and

          (b) in any other case, the data controller ensures
              so far as practicable that, before the relevant
              time or as soon as practicable after that time,
              the data subject is provided with, or has readily
              available to him, the information specified in
              paragraph (a).

   (4) For the purposes of sub-section (3)(b), “the relevant
time” means–


                        (a) the time when the data controller first processes
                            the data; or

                        (b) in a case where at that time disclosure to a third
                            party within a reasonable period is envisaged–

                             (i)     if the data is in fact disclosed to such a
                                     person within that period, the time when
                                     the data is first disclosed;

                             (ii)    if within that period the data controller
                                     becomes, or ought to become aware that
                                     the data is unlikely to be disclosed to such
                                     a person within that period, the time when
                                     the data controller does become, or ought
                                     to become, so aware; or

                             (iii)   in any other case, the end of that period.

Lawfulness of   7.–(1) For the purposes of section 4(1)(a), processing shall
processing
                be lawful where–

                        (a) the data subject has given consent to the
                            processing of his personal data for one or more
                            specific purposes; or

                        (b) the processing is necessary–

                             (i)     for the performance of a contract to which
                                     the data subject is a party;

                             (ii)    for the taking of steps at the request of
                                     the data subject with a view to entering
                                     into a contract;

                             (iii)   for compliance with any legal obligation to
                                     which the data controller is subject, other
                                     than an obligation imposed by contract;


             (iv)   in order to protect the vital interests of
                    the data subject;

             (v)    for the administration of justice;

             (vi)   for the exercise of any functions of either
                    House of the National Assembly;

             (vii) for the exercise of any functions conferred
                   on any person by or under any enactment;

             (viii) for the exercise of any functions of a
                    public authority;
             (ix) for the purposes of legitimate interests
                    pursued by the data controller or by
                    any third party to whom the data is
                    disclosed, except where the processing
                    is unwarranted in any particular case
                    by reason of prejudice to the rights and
                    freedoms or legitimate interests of the
                    data subject; or

             (x)    for the purposes of the legitimate interests
                    pursued by the data controller or by any
                    third party, except where such interests are
                    overridden by the interests or fundamental
                    rights and freedoms of the data subject
                    which require protection of personal data,
                    in particular where the data subject is a
                    child.

   (2) Sub-section (1)(b)(x) shall not apply to processing
carried out by public authorities in the performance of their
tasks.

8.–(1) Where processing is based on consent, the data              
controller shall demonstrate that the data subject has consented
to processing of his personal data.


                     (2) Where the data subject’s consent is given in the context
                 of a written declaration which also concerns other matters, the
                 request for consent shall be presented in a manner which is
                 clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible
                 and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language.

                     (3) A data subject has the right to withdraw his consent
                 in respect of the processing of his personal data at any time
                 and the data controller shall inform the data subject of his
                 right to withdraw prior to him giving consent to the data
                 controller to process his personal data.

                     (4) The withdrawal of consent by a data subject shall not
                 affect the lawfulness of processing based on consent before
                 its withdrawal.

                     (5) In determining whether consent is freely given, the data
                 controller shall take into account whether the performance of
                 a contract, including the provision of a service, is conditional
                 on consent to the processing of personal data that is not
                 necessary for the performance of that contract.

      9.–(1) The processing of a child’s personal data shall be

                 lawful only where, and to the extent that, consent is given
         or authorised by–

                         (a) the parent or guardian of the child; or

                         (b) the child where the child is over the age of
                             thirteen.

                    (2) A child shall receive the same privacy protections and
                 rights as an adult.

       10.–(1) Processing of sensitive personal data shall be
     prohibited unless–


                         (a) the data subject gives consent to the processing;


          (b) the processing is necessary for the purposes of
              exercising or performing any right or obligation
              which is conferred or imposed by law on the
              data controller in connection with employment;

          (c) the processing is necessary in order to protect
              the vital interests of the data subject or another
              person, in a case where–

               (i)     consent cannot be given by or on behalf
                       of the data subject; or

               (ii)    the data controller cannot reasonably be
                       expected to obtain the consent of the data
                       subject;

          (d) the processing is necessary in order to protect
              the vital interests of another person, in a case
              where consent by or on behalf of the data subject
              has been unreasonably withheld;

          (e) the processing–

               (i)     is carried out in the course of its legitimate
                       activities by a body or association which–

                        (A) is not established or conducted for
                            profit; and

                        (B) exists for political, philosophical,
                            religious or trade union purposes;

               (ii)    is carried out with appropriate safeguards
                       for the rights and freedoms of data
                       subjects;

               (iii)   relates only to individuals who either are
                       members of the body or association or


                    have regular contact with it in connection
                    with its purposes; and

            (iv)    does not involve disclosure of the personal
                    data to a third party without the consent
                    of the data subject;

      (f) the information contained in the personal data has
          been made public as a result of steps deliberately
          taken by the data subject;

      (g) the processing is necessary–

            (i)     for the purpose of, or in connection
                    with, any legal proceedings, including
                    prospective legal proceedings;

            (ii)    for the purpose of obtaining legal advice;
                    or

            (iii)   for the purpose of establishing, exercising
                    or defending legal rights;

      (h) the processing is necessary for the administration
          of justice;

      (i)    the processing is necessary for the exercise of
            any functions of either House of the National
            Assembly;

      (j) the processing is necessary for the exercise of
          any functions conferred on any person by or
          under an enactment;

      (k) the processing is necessary for the exercise of
          any functions of a public authority;

      (l) the processing is necessary for medical purposes
          and is undertaken by–


              (i)     a health care professional; or

              (ii)    a person who in the circumstances owes a
                      duty of confidentiality which is equivalent
                      to that which would arise if that person
                      were a health care professional; or

          (m) the processing–

              (i)     is of sensitive personal data consisting of
                      information as to racial or ethnic origin;

              (ii)    is necessary for the purpose of identifying
                      or keeping under review, the existence
                      or absence of equality of opportunity or
                      treatment between persons of different
                      racial or ethnic origins, with a view to
                      enabling such equality to be promoted
                      or maintained; and

              (iii)   is carried out with appropriate safeguards
                      for the rights and freedoms of data
                      subjects.

		 (2) The processing of personal data relating to criminal
convictions and offences or related security measures shall
be carried out only under the control of an official authority
responsible for processing such personal data or when the
processing is authorised by any enactment providing for
appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of data
subjects.

		 (3) Any comprehensive register of criminal convictions
shall be kept only under the control of an official authority.

		(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(l) “medical
purposes” includes the purposes of preventative medicine,


           medical diagnosis, medical research, the provision of care
           and treatment and the management of health care services.

                                      PART III

                                Rights of a Data Subject

Right of   11.–(1) A data subject has the right–
access.

                   (a) to be informed by a data controller whether
                       personal data of that data subject is being
                       processed by or on behalf of the data controller;
                       or

                   (b) where personal data of the data subject is being
                       processed by or on behalf of the data controller,
                       to request from, and to be given by, the data
                       controller, a description of–

                        (i)      the purposes of the processing;

                        (ii)     the categories of personal data concerned;
                        (iii)    the recipients or categories of recipient to
                                 whom the personal data has been or will be
                                 disclosed, in particular recipients in other
                                 countries or international organisations;

                        (iv)     where possible, the envisaged period for
                                 which the personal data will be stored,
                                 or, if not possible, the criteria used to
                                 determine that period;

                        (v)      the existence of the right to request
                                 from the data controller rectification or
                                 erasure of personal data or restriction of
                                 processing of personal data concerning
                                 the data subject or to object to such
                                 processing;


             (vi)   the right to lodge a complaint with the
                    Commissioner;

             (vii) any available information as to their
                   source, where the personal data is not
                   collected from the data subject; or

             (viii) the existence of automated decision-
                    making, including profiling, referred to
                    in section 19 and, at least in those cases,
                    meaningful information about the logic
                    involved, as well as the significance
                    and the envisaged consequences of such
                    processing for the data subject.

		 (2) Where personal data is transferred to another country
or to an international organisation, the data subject shall
have the right to be informed of the appropriate safeguards
pursuant to section 25.

		 (3) A data controller shall provide a copy of the personal
data undergoing processing to the data subject and where more
copies are requested by the data subject, the data controller
may charge a reasonable fee based on administrative costs.

		 (4) Where a data subject makes the request for personal
data by electronic means, and unless otherwise requested
by the data subject, the personal data shall be provided in
electronic form.

		 (5) The right of the data subject to obtain a copy of
personal data referred to sub-section (3) shall not adversely
affect the rights and freedoms of other data subjects.

12.–(1) A data subject shall have the right to obtain from        Right to
                                                                  rectification.
a data controller, without undue delay, the rectification of
inaccurate personal data concerning the data subject.


           		 (2) Taking into account the purposes of the processing, a
           data subject shall have the right to have incomplete personal
           data completed by a data controller and to be provided with
           a copy of the updated personal data.

Right to   13.–(1) A data subject shall have the right to obtain from a
erasure.   data controller the erasure of personal data concerning him
           without undue delay.

           		 (2) A data controller shall erase personal data, without
           undue delay, where one of the following grounds apply–

                   (a) the personal data is no longer necessary in relation
                       to the purposes for which it was collected or
                       otherwise processed;

                   (b) the data subject withdraws consent where the
                       .processing is done pursuant to section 7(1)(a)
                       or section 10(1)(a), and where there is no other
                       legal ground for the processing;

                   (c) the data subject objects to the processing pursuant
                       to section 17 and there are no overriding
                       legitimate grounds for the processing, or the
                       data subject objects to the processing pursuant
                       to section 18;

                   (d) the personal data has been unlawfully processed;
                       or

                   (e) the personal data has to be erased in compliance
                       with a legal obligation in Belize to which the
                       data controller is subject.

               (3) Where a data controller has made personal data
           public and is obliged pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) to
           erase the personal data, the data controller, taking account
           of available technology and the cost of implementation,
           shall take reasonable steps, including technical measures,
           to inform data controllers who are processing the personal


data that the data subject has requested the erasure by such
data controllers of any links to, or copy or replication of,
the personal data.

		 (4) Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall not apply to the
extent that processing is necessary for–

          (a) exercising the right of freedom of expression
              and information;

          (b) compliance with a legal obligation which requires
              processing by any enactment to which the data
              controller is subject or for the performance of
              a task carried out in the public interest or in the
              exercise of official authority vested in the data
              controller;

          (c) reasons of public interest in the area of public
              health;

          (d) archiving for the purposes of research, history
              or statistics in accordance with section 36; or

          (e) the establishment, exercise or defence of legal
              claims.

14.–(1) A data subject shall have the right to obtain from          
                                                                    
a data controller, restriction of processing of personal data       
where one of the following applies–

          (a) the accuracy of the personal data is contested
              by the data subject;

          (b) the processing is unlawful and the data subject
              opposes the erasure of the personal data and
              requests the restriction of their use instead;

          (c) the data controller no longer needs the personal
              data for the purposes of the processing, but
                              they are required by the data subject for the
                              establishment, exercise or defence of legal
                              claims; or

                         (d) the data subject has objected to processing
                             pursuant to section 17 pending the verification
                             whether the legitimate grounds of the data
                             controller override those of the data subject.

                 		 (2) A restriction of processing under sub-section (1)(a)
                 may be for a period enabling the data controller to verify the
                 accuracy of the personal data;

                 		 (3) Where processing has been restricted under sub-
                 section (1), the personal data shall, with the exception of
                 storage, only be processed–

                         (a) with the data subject’s consent;

                         (b) for the establishment, exercise or defence of
                             legal claims;

                         (c) for the protection of the rights of another person;
                             or

                         (d) for reasons of important public interest in Belize.

                 		(4) A data subject who has obtained restriction of
                 processing of personal data pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
                 be informed by the data controller before the restriction of
                 processing of personal data is removed pursuant to sub-section
                 (2).
     15.–(1) A data controller shall communicate to every recipient
        to whom the personal data of a data subject has been disclosed,

   unless this proves impossible or involves disproportionate
   effort, any–

            (a) rectification of personal data pursuant to section
                        12;


          (b) erasure of personal data pursuant to section 13;
              or

          (c) restriction of processing of personal data
              pursuant to section 14.

		 (2) A data controller shall inform the data subject about
the recipients to whom personal data has been disclosed if
the data subject requests such information.

16.–(1) A data subject has the right to receive his personal data   
he provided to a data controller, in a structured, commonly
used and machine-readable format.

		 (2) A data subject has the right to transmit his personal
he provided to a data controller to another data controller
without hindrance where–

          (a) the processing is based on consent pursuant
              to section 7(1) (a) or section 10(1)(a) or on a
              contract pursuant to section 7(1)(b)(i); and

          (b) the processing is carried out by automated
              means.

		 (3) In exercising his right to data portability pursuant to
sub-sections (1) and (2), a data subject shall have the right
to have his personal data transmitted directly from one data
controller to another, where technically feasible.

		 (4) The exercise of the right referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be exercised without prejudice to section 13.

		 (5) The exercise of the right referred to in sub-section (1)
shall not apply to processing necessary for the performance
of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise
of official authority vested in the data controller.


                  		 (6) The exercise of the right referred to in sub-section
                  (1) shall not adversely affect the rights and freedoms of other
                  data subjects.

          17.–(1) Subject to sub-section (2), a data subject may, by a
        written notice to a data controller, require that data controller,
  at the end of a twenty one day period to, cease, or not to
         begin, processing, or processing for a specified purpose or
                  in a specified manner, any personal data of the data subject,
                  on the grounds that–

                          (a) the processing of the data or the data controller’s
                              processing for that purpose or in that manner is
                              causing or is likely to cause substantial damage
                              or distress to the data subject or another; and

                          (b) the damage or distress is or would be unwarranted.

                     (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply–

                          (a) in a case where any of the conditions in section
                              7(1) (a) or (b)(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) are satisfied;
                              or

                          (b) in such other cases as the Minister may prescribe
                              by Order published in the Gazette.

                  		 (3) A data controller shall, within twenty one days of
                  receiving a notice under sub-section (1), give the data subject
                  written notice stating–

                          (a) that he has complied or intends to comply with
                              the data subject’s notice;

                          (b) the reasons for his refusal to comply with the
                              data subject’s notice; or

                          (c) the reasons for complying with part of the
                              data subject’s notice and the extent of that
                              compliance.


		(4) Where the Supreme Court is satisfied, on the
application of a data subject who has given notice under
sub-section (1), that a data controller has failed to comply
with the notice, the Court may order the data controller to
take such steps for complying with the notice as the Court
sees fit.

18.–(1) A data subject may, by written notice to a data         
controller, require the data controller at the end of a twenty   
                                                                 
one day period to cease processing for the purposes of direct    
marketing, personal data of the data subject.                   
                                                                

		(2) Where the Supreme Court is satisfied, on the
application of a data subject who has given notice under
sub-section (1), that the data controller has failed to comply
with the notice, the Court may order the data controller to
take such steps for complying with the notice as the Court
sees fit.

		 (3) For the purposes of this section “direct marketing”
means the communication, by whatever means, of any
advertising or marketing material which is directed to
particular individuals.

19.–(1) A data subject has the right not to be subject to a     
                                                                 
decision based solely on automated processing, including         
profiling, which produces legal effects concerning him or        
                                                                
similarly significantly affects him.                             

		 (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply where the automated
processing or profiling of personal data is–

          (a) necessary for entering into, or performance of,
              a contract between the data subject and a data
              controller;

          (b) authorised by any enactment to which the data
              controller is subject and which also lays down


                              suitable measures to safeguard the data subject’s
                              rights and freedoms and legitimate interests; or

                         (c) based on the data subject’s consent.

                 		 (3) In the cases referred to in sub-section (2)(a) and
                 (c), a data controller shall implement suitable measures to
                 safeguard a data subject’s rights and freedoms and legitimate
                 interests.

                 		 (4) Sub-section (2) shall not apply to sensitive personal
                 data unless it is in the public interest and suitable measures
                 to safeguard the data subject’s rights and freedoms and
                 legitimate interests are in place.

    20.–(1) Where personal data relating to a data subject is

           collected from the data subject, a data controller shall, at
   the time when the personal data is obtained, provide the data

  subject with the following–

                         (a) the identity and the contact details of the data
                             controller and, where applicable, of the data
                             controller’s representative;

                         (b) the contact details of the data privacy officer,
                             where applicable;

                         (c) the purposes of the processing for which the
                             personal data is intended as well as the legal
                             basis for the processing;

                         (d) where the processing is done pursuant to section
                             7(1)(b)(x), the legitimate interests pursued by
                             the data controller or by a third party; or

                         (e) the recipients or categories of recipients of the
                             personal data, if any.

                 		 (2) In addition to the information referred to in sub-
                 section (1), a data controller shall at the time when personal


data is obtained, provide the data subject with the following
information necessary to ensure fair and transparent
processing–

          (a) the period for which the personal data will be
              stored, or if that is not possible, the criteria
              used to determine that period;
          (b) the existence of the right to request from the
              data controller access to and rectification
              or erasure of personal data or restriction of
              processing concerning the data subject or to
              object to processing as well as the right to data
              portability;
          (c) where the processing is done pursuant to section
              7(1)(a) or section 10(1)(a), the existence of the
              right to withdraw consent at any time, without
              affecting the lawfulness of processing based on
              consent before its withdrawal;

          (d) the right to lodge a complaint with the
              Commissioner;
          (e) whether the provision of personal data is a
              statutory or contractual requirement, or a
              requirement necessary to enter into a contract,
              as well as whether the data subject is obliged
              to provide the personal data and of the possible
              consequences of failure to provide such data;
              or
          (f) the existence of automated decision-making,
              including profiling, referred to in section 19
              and meaningful information about the logic
              involved, as well as the significance and the
              envisaged consequences of such processing for
              the data subject.

		 (3) Where the data controller intends to further process
the personal data for a purpose other than that for which


                 the personal data was collected, the data controller shall
                 provide the data subject, prior to the further processing of
                 the personal data, with information on that other purpose
                 and with any relevant further information as referred to in
                 sub-section (2).

                 		 (4) Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall not apply where
                 the data subject already has the information.

      21.–(1) Where personal data has not been obtained from the

                 data subject, a data controller shall provide the data subject
    with the following–



                         (a) the identity and the contact details of the data
                             controller and, where applicable, of the data
                             controller’s representative;

                         (b) the contact details of the data privacy officer,
                             where applicable;

                         (c) the purposes of the processing for which the
                             personal data is intended as well as the legal
                             basis for the processing;
                         (d) the categories of personal data concerned; or

                         (e) the recipients or categories of recipients of the
                             personal data, if any.

                 		 (2) A data controller shall provide a data subject with
                 the following information necessary to ensure fair and
                 transparent processing in respect of the data subject–

                         (a) the period for which the personal data will be
                             stored, or if that is not possible, the criteria
                             used to determine that period;

                         (b) where the processing is done pursuant to section
                             7(1)(b)(x), the legitimate interests pursued by
                             the data controller;


          (c) the existence of the right to request from the data
              controller access to and rectification or erasure
              of personal data or restriction of processing
              concerning the data subject and to object to
              processing as well as the right to data portability;

          (d) where processing is done pursuant to section
              7(1)(a) or section 10(1)(a), the existence of the
              right to withdraw consent at any time, without
              affecting the lawfulness of processing based on
              consent before its withdrawal;

          (e) the right to lodge a complaint with the
              Commissioner;

          (f) from the source from which originated the
              personal data, and if applicable, whether it came
              from publicly accessible sources; or

          (g) the existence of automated decision-making,
              including profiling, referred to in section 19 and
              meaningful information about the logic involved,
              as well as the significance and the envisaged
              consequences of such processing for the data
              subject.

		 (3) The data controller shall provide the information
referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2)–

          (a) within a reasonable period after obtaining the
              personal data, but not later than one month after
              obtaining the personal data, having regard to the
              specific circumstances in which the personal data
              is processed;

          (b) if the personal data is to be used for communication
              with the data subject, not later than the time of
              the first communication to the data subject; or


                           (c) if a disclosure to another recipient is envisaged,
                               not later than when the personal data is first
                               disclosed to another recipient.

                   		 (4) Where the data controller intends to further process
                   the personal data for a purpose other than that for which the
                   personal data was obtained, the data controller shall provide
                   the data subject, prior to further processing the personal data,
                   with information on that other purpose and with any relevant
                   further information as referred to in sub-section (2).

                   		 (5) Sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall not apply
                   where–

                           (a) the data subject already has the information;

                           (b) the provision of such information proves
                               impossible or would involve a disproportionate
                               effort, in particular for processing for archiving
                               purposes pursuant to section 36;

                           (c) obtaining of disclosure is expressly laid down
                               by any enactment to which the data controller is
                               subject and which provides appropriate measures
                               to protect the data subject’s legitimate interests;
                               or

                           (d) where the personal data must remain confidential
                               subject to an obligation of professional secrecy
                               regulated by any enactment.

        22.–(1) A data controller shall take appropriate measures to

                   provide any information referred to in sections 20 and 21 and
    any communication under sections 11 to 19 and 59 relating


                   to processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent,
       intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain

                   language.


   (2) The information pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
provided in writing, or by other means, including, where
appropriate, by electronic means.

		 (3) When requested by a data subject, a data controller
may provide the information, pursuant to the rights of the
data subject under sections 11 to 16 and section 19, orally.

		 (4) Prior to providing information orally, a data controller
shall verify the identity of the data subject.

		 (5) A data controller shall facilitate the exercise of data
subject rights under sections 11 to 16 and 19.

		 (6) A data controller shall provide information on action
taken on a request under sections 11 to 16 and 18 to the data
subject without undue delay and in any event within one
month of receipt of the request.

		 (7) The period of time referred to in sub-section (6) may
be extended by two months where necessary, taking into
account the complexity and number of the requests under
sections 11 to 16 and 18.

		 (8) A data controller shall inform a data subject of any
extension granted pursuant to sub-section (7) within one
month of receipt of the request, together with the reasons
for the delay.

		 (9) Where a data subject makes a request pursuant to his
rights under sections 11 to 16 and 18 by electronic means,
the information shall be provided by electronic means where
possible, unless otherwise requested by the data subject.

		 (10) Where a data controller does not take action on
the request of a data subject under this section, the data
controller shall inform the data subject, without delay and
not later than one month of receipt of the request, of–


              (a) the reasons for not taking action; and

              (b) on the possibility of lodging a complaint with
                  the Commissioner or appealing to the Supreme
                  Court.

      		 (11) Information provided under sections 19 and 20 and
      any communication and any action taken under sections 11
      to 16, 19 and 59, shall be provided free of charge.

      		 (12) Where requests referred to in this section from a data
      subject are manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular
      because of their repetitive character, a data controller may–

                 (a) charge a reasonable fee taking into account
                     the administrative costs of providing the
                     information or communication or taking the
                     action requested; or

                 (b) refuse to act on the request.

      		 (13) A data subject may object to the decision of a data
      controller made pursuant to sub-section (12) by lodging a
      complaint with the Commissioner or appealing to the Tribunal.

      		 (14) A data subject may be represented by a not-for-
      profit organisation when making complaints and pursuing
      appeals under this Act.

      		(15) For the purposes of sub-section (13), a data
      controller shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestly
      unfounded or excessive character of a request referred to in
      sub-section (12).

      		(16) Where a data controller has reasonable doubts
      concerning the identity of an individual making a request
      pursuant to sections 11 to 19, the data controller may request
      the provision of additional information necessary to confirm
      the identity of the data subject.


		 (17) The information to be provided to data subjects
pursuant to sections 20 and 21, may be provided in combination
with standardised icons in order to give in an easily visible,
intelligible and clearly legible manner a meaningful overview
of the intended processing and where the icons are presented
electronically they shall be machine-readable.

		 (18) The Minister, in consultation with the Commissioner,
may make regulations for the purpose of determining the
information to be presented by the icons and the procedures
for providing standardised icons.

                          PART IV

       Transfers of Personal Data outside of Belize

23.–(1) Where personal data is transferred to a country or       
territory outside Belize, the transferor shall ensure there is–   


          (a) an adequate level of protection for the rights
              and freedoms of data subjects in relation to
              the processing of their personal data; and

          (b) appropriate safeguards on condition that the
              rights of the data subject are enforceable and
              that there are effective legal remedies available
              for data subjects.

    (2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) nothing in this Act
prevents the transfer of data from Belize to a country or
territory outside Belize for the purposes of cloud storage
and consent of any data subject is not required for transfer
of data from Belize to a country or territory outside Belize
for the purposes of cloud storage.

24. For the purposes of section 23(a), an adequate level of       
                                                                  
protection is one which is adequate in all the circumstances
of the case, having regard to–


                        (a) the nature of the personal data;

                        (b) the country or territory of origin of the
                            information contained in the data;

                        (c) the country or territory of final destination of
                            that information;

                        (d) the purposes for which the data is intended
                            to be processed;

                        (e) the period during which the data is intended
                            to be processed;

                        (f) the law in force in the country or territory in
                            question;

                        (g) the international obligations of that country
                            or territory;

                        (h) any relevant codes of conduct or other rules
                            which are enforceable in that country or
                            territory, whether generally or by arrangement
                            in particular cases; and

                        (i) any security measures taken in respect of the
                            data in that country or territory.

Appropriate   25. For the purposes of section 23(b), appropriate safeguards
safeguards.   may be provided for by–

                        (a) a legally binding and enforceable instrument
                            between public authorities;

                        (b) binding corporate rules in accordance with
                            section 26;

                        (c) standard data protection clauses prescribed
                            by the Commissioner with the approval of
                            the Minister;


          (d) contractual clauses authorised by the
              Commissioner between a data controller or
              data processor and a data controller, data
              processor or the recipient of personal data; or

          (e) provisions authorised by the Commissioner to
              be inserted into administrative arrangements
              between public authorities, which include
              enforceable and effective data subject rights.

26.–(1) Data controllers and data processors shall develop       
                                                                 
binding corporate rules which shall specify–                      

          (a) the structure and contact details of the group of
              undertakings, or group of enterprises engaged
              in a joint economic activity and of each of its
              members;

          (b) the data transfers or set of transfers, including
              the categories of personal data, the type of
              processing and its purposes, the type of data
              subjects affected and the identification of the
              third country or countries in question;

          (c) their legally binding nature, both in and outside
              of Belize;

          (d) the application of principles regarding purpose
              limitation, data minimisation, limited storage
              periods, data quality, data protection by design
              and by default, legal basis for processing,
              processing of sensitive personal data, measures
              to ensure data security, and the requirements
              in respect of onward transfers to bodies not
              bound by the binding corporate rules;

          (e) the rights of data subjects in regard to
              processing and the means to exercise those
              rights, including the right not to be subject


          to decisions based solely on automated
          processing, including profiling in accordance
          with this Act, the right to lodge a complaint
          with the competent supervisory authority or
          Commissioner and the Supreme Court and
          to obtain any other available form of redress
          and, where appropriate, compensation for a
          breach of the binding corporate rules;

      (f) the acceptance by a data controller or data
          processor of liability for any breaches of the
          binding corporate rules;

      (g) that the data controller or the data processor
          shall be exempt from the liability referred to
          in paragraph (f), in whole or in part, only
          where it is proven that the data controller or
          data processor is not responsible for the event
          giving rise to the damage;

      (h) how the information on the binding corporate
          rules is provided to the data subjects;

      (i) the complaint procedures;

      (j) the mechanisms within the group of
          undertakings, or group of enterprises engaged
          in a joint economic activity for ensuring the
          verification of compliance with the binding
          corporate rules;

      (k) the mechanisms for reporting and recording
          changes to the binding corporate rules and
          reporting those changes to the supervisory
          authority;

      (l) the cooperation mechanism with the
          supervisory authority to ensure compliance
          by any member of the group of undertakings,


               or group of enterprises engaged in a joint
               economic activity, in particular by making
               available to the supervisory authority or
               Commissioner the results of verifications of
               the measures specified in paragraph (j);

          (m) the mechanisms for reporting to the competent
              supervisory authority any legal requirements to
              which a member of the group of undertakings,
              or group of enterprises engaged in a joint
              economic activity is subject, which are likely
              to have a substantial adverse effect on the
              guarantees provided by the binding corporate
              rules; and

          (n) the appropriate data protection training to
              personnel having permanent or regular access
              to personal data.

		 (2) Binding corporate rules referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be submitted to the Commissioner for authorisation.

		 (3) A code of conduct or certification mechanism shall
be put in place by which a data controller can demonstrate
appropriate technical and organisational measures.

		(4) The Commissioner may specify the format and
procedures for the exchange of information between data
controllers, data processors and supervisory authorities for
binding corporate rules.

		 (5) For the purposes of this section–

          (a) “binding corporate rules” mean personal
              data protection policies which are adhered
              to by a data controller or data processor for
              transfers or a set of transfers of personal
              data to a data controller or a data processor


                             in one or more countries within a group of
                             undertakings, or group of enterprises engaged
                             in a joint economic activity;

                         (b) “enterprise” means a person engaged in an
                             economic activity; or

                         (c) “supervisory authority” means an independent
                             public authority which is established in a
                             country or territory outside of Belize.

   27. The principles for transfers under section 23 shall not
               apply where–

                         (a) the data subject has given his consent to the
                             transfer of personal data;

                         (b) the transfer of personal data is necessary for–

                              (i)      the performance of a contract between
                                      the data subject and the data controller;

                              (ii)     the taking of steps at the request of the
                                      data subject with a view to his entering
                                      into a contract with the data controller;

                              (iii)   the conclusion of a contract between
                                      the data controller and a person other
                                      than the data subject which–

                                      (A)    is entered into at the request of
                                             the data subject; or

                                      (B)    is in the interest of the data
                                             subject;

                              (iv)    the performance of a contract described
                                      in sub-paragraph (iii);


               (v)    reasons of substantial public
                      interest;

               (vi)   the purpose of, or in connection with,
                      any legal proceedings including
                      prospective legal proceedings;

               (vii) the purpose of obtaining legal
                     advice;

               (viii) the purposes of establishing,
                      exercising or defending legal
                      rights; or

               (ix)   the protection of the vital interests
                      of the data subject;

          (c) the transfer of personal data is part of the
              personal data on a public register and any
              conditions subject to which the register is
              open to inspection are complied with by
              any person to whom the data is or may
              be disclosed after the transfer;

          (d) the transfer of personal data is made on
              terms which are of a kind approved by
              the Commissioner as ensuring adequate
              safeguards for the rights and freedoms of
              data subjects; or

          (e) the transfer of personal data has been
              authorised by the Commissioner as being
              made in such a manner as to ensure
              adequate safeguards for the rights and
              freedoms of data subjects.

28. A person who contravenes sections 23 commits an            Non-compliance.
offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of
twenty thousand dollars.


Substantial        29.–(1) The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette,
public interest.
                   specify the–

                             (a) circumstances in which a transfer of the
                                 personal data of data subjects outside of Belize
                                 is to be considered to be necessary for reasons
                                 of substantial public interest; and

                             (b) circumstances in which a transfer of the
                                 personal data of data subjects outside of
                                 Belize, which is not required by or under an
                                 enactment, is not to be considered necessary
                                 for reasons of substantial public interest.

                   		 (2) An Order made pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
                   subject to negative resolution.

                                              PART V

                                             Exemptions

         30.–(1) In this Part–


               (a) “subject information provisions” refer to–


                                  (i)      section 4(1)(a) to the extent to which it
                                           requires compliance with section 6(2);
                                           and

                                  (ii)     section 11; and

                             (b) “non-disclosure provisions” refers to the
                                 following provisions to the extent to which
                                 they are inconsistent with the disclosure in
                                 question–

                                  (i)      section 4(1)(a), except to the extent to
                                           which it requires compliance with the
                                           conditions in sections 7 and 10;


                (ii)    section 4(1) (b), (c), (d), (e); and

                (iii)   sections 12 to 19.

		(2) Except as provided for by this Part, subject
information provisions shall have effect notwithstanding
any enactment or rule of law prohibiting or restricting the
disclosure, or authorising the withholding of information.

31. Parts II, III, IV, VII and section 77 shall not apply where    
                                                                  
the processing of personal data is required for the purpose
of safeguarding national security.

32.–(1) Personal data processed for–                             
                                                                 

           (a) the prevention or detection of crime;

           (b) the apprehension or prosecution of offenders;
               or

           (c) the assessment or collection of any tax, duty
               or other imposition of a similar nature,

is exempt from section 4(1)(a), except to the extent to which
it requires compliance with the conditions in sections 7 and
10, and from section 11, in any case, to the extent to which
the application of those provisions to the data is likely to
prejudice any of the matters mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (c).

		 (2) Personal data which–

           (a) is processed for the purpose of discharging
               statutory functions; and

           (b) consist of information obtained for such a
               purpose from a person who had it in his
               possession for any of the purposes mentioned
               in sub-section (1) (a) to (c),


      is exempt from subject information provisions to the same
      extent as personal data processed for any of the purposes
      mentioned in sub-section (1) (a) to (c).

      		(3) Personal data is exempt from non-disclosure
      provisions where–

                (a) the disclosure is for any of the purposes
                     mentioned in sub-section (1)(a) to (c); and

                (b) the application of those provisions in relation
                    to disclosure is likely to prejudice any of the
                    matters mentioned in sub-section (1)(a) to (c).

      		 (4) Personal data in respect of which a data controller
      is a public authority and which–

                (a) consists of a classification applied to the data
                    subject as a part of a system of risk assessment
                    which is operated by the public authority for
                    any of the following purposes–

                      (i)    the assessment or collection of any tax,
                             duty or other imposition of a similar
                             nature; or

                      (ii)   the prevention or detection of crime
                             or the apprehension or prosecution of
                             offenders, where the offence concerned
                             involves an unlawful claim for payment
                             out of, or an unlawful application of,
                             public funds; and

                (b) is processed for either of those purposes,

      is exempt from section 11 to the extent to which the exemption
      is required in the interests of the operation of the system.


33.–(1) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette,       
                                                                  
exempt from subject information provisions, or modify subject      
information provisions in relation to, personal data–

          (a) consisting of information as to the physical or
              mental health or condition of a data subject;

          (b) in respect of which the data controller is an
              educational institution and which consists of
              information relating to persons who are or
              have been pupils at the educational institution;

          (c) in respect of which the data controller is
              a tertiary institution and which consists of
              information relating to persons who are or
              have been students at the tertiary institution;
              or

          (d) of such other description as may be specified
              in the Order, being information processed–

                (i)    by public authorities, charities or other
                       entities designated by or under the
                       Order; and

                (ii)   in the course of, or for the purposes of,
                       carrying out social work in relation to
                       the data subject or other individuals.

		 (2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1)(d), the Minister shall
not confer any exemption or make any modification under
sub-section (1)(d) except so far as the Minister considers that
the application to the data of those provisions, or of those
provisions without modification, is likely to prejudice the
carrying out of social work.
34. –(1) Personal data processed for the purposes of               
                                                                  
discharging functions to which this section applies is exempt
from subject information provisions to the extent to which
the application of those provisions to the data would be likely
to prejudice the proper discharge of those functions.


      		 (2) Sub-section (1) applies to any relevant function which
      is designed for the purpose of–

                (a) protecting members of the public against–

                     (i)     financial loss due to dishonesty,
                             malpractice or other seriously improper
                             conduct by, or the unfitness or
                             incompetence of, persons concerned
                             in the provision of banking, insurance,
                             investment or other financial services or
                             in the management of bodies corporate;

                     (ii)    financial loss due to the conduct of
                             discharged or undischarged bankrupts;
                             or

                     (iii)   dishonesty, malpractice or other
                             seriously improper conduct by, or the
                             unfitness or incompetence of, persons
                             authorised to carry on any profession
                             or other activity;

                (b) protecting charities against misconduct or
                    mismanagement, whether by trustees or other
                    persons in their administration;

                (c) protecting the property of charities from loss
                    or misapplication;

                (d) the recovery of the property of charities;

                (e) securing the health, safety and welfare of
                    persons at work; or

                (f) protecting persons other than persons at work
                    against risk to health or safety arising out of,
                    or in connection with, the actions of persons
                    at work.


		 (3) Personal data processed for the purpose of discharging
any function which is designed for protecting members of
the public against–

          (a) maladministration by public authorities;
          (b) failures in services provided by public
              authorities; or

          (c) a failure of a public authority to provide a
              service which it is a function of the authority
              to provide,

is exempt from subject information provisions in any case,
to the extent to which the application of those provisions to
the data would be likely to prejudice the proper discharge
of that function.

		 (4) Personal data processed for the purpose of discharging
any function which is designed for–

          (a) protecting members of the public against
              conduct which may adversely affect their
              interests by persons carrying on a business;

          (b) regulating agreements or conduct which
              have as their object or effect the prevention,
              restriction or distortion of competition in
              connection with any commercial activity; or

          (c) regulating conduct on the part of one or more
              undertakings which amounts to the abuse of
              a dominant position in a market,

is exempt from subject information provisions, to the extent
to which the application of those provisions to the data would
be likely to prejudice the proper discharge of that function.

		 (5) For the purposes of sub-section (2) “relevant function”
means–


                           (a) any function conferred on any person by or
                               under any enactment;

                           (b) any function of a public authority; or

                           (c) any other function which is of a public nature
                               and is exercised in the public interest.

      35.–(1) Personal data which is processed only for the purposes
   of journalism or for artistic or literary purposes is exempt

                 from any provision to which this subsection relates where–

                           (a) the processing is undertaken with a view to the
                               publication by any person of any journalistic,
                               literary or artistic material;

                           (b) the data controller reasonably believes that,
                               having regard to the special importance of
                               the public interest in freedom of expression,
                               publication would be in the public interest;
                               and

                           (c) the data controller reasonably believes that,
                               in all the circumstances, compliance with that
                               provision is incompatible with the purpose of
                               journalism or artistic or literary purposes.

                 		 (2) In considering for the purposes of sub-section (1)(b)
                 whether the belief of a data controller that publication would
                 be in the public interest was or is a reasonable one, regard
                 may be had to his compliance with any code of practice which
                 is relevant to the publication in question and is designated
                 by the Minister by Order published in the Gazette, for the
                 purposes of this sub-section.

                 		 (3) In any proceedings against a data controller where
                 the data controller claims, or it appears that any personal
                 data to which the proceedings relate are being processed–

                           (a) only for the purposes of journalism or for
                               artistic or literary purposes; and


          (b) with a view to the publication by any person
              of any journalistic, literary or artistic material
              which, at the time 24 hours immediately
              before the relevant time, had not previously
              been published by the data controller,

the proceedings shall be stayed until either of the conditions
in sub-section (4) are met.

		 (4) The conditions referred to in sub-section (3) are–

          (a) that a determination of the Commissioner with
              respect to the data in question takes effect;
              or

          (b) in a case where the proceedings were stayed
              on the making of a claim, that the claim is
              withdrawn.

		 (5) For the purposes of this section “publication”, in
relation to journalistic, literary or artistic material, means
make available to the public or any section of the public.

36.–(1) The processing of personal data only for research          
                                                                
purposes in compliance with the relevant conditions is not         
to be regarded as incompatible with the purposes for which
it was obtained.

		 (2) Personal data which is processed only for research
purposes in compliance with the relevant conditions may be
kept indefinitely.

		 (3) Personal data which is processed only for research
purposes is exempt from section 11 where–

          (a) the personal data is processed in compliance
              with the relevant conditions; and

          (b) the results of the research or any resulting
              statistics are not made available in a form
              which identifies data subjects.


                 		 (4) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) to (3), personal
                 data is not to be treated as processed otherwise than for
                 research purposes merely because the data is disclosed–

                           (a) to any person, for research purposes only;

                           (b) to the data subject or a person acting on his
                               behalf;

                           (c) at the request, or with the consent, of the data
                               subject or a person acting on his behalf; or

                           (d) in circumstances in which the person making
                               the disclosure has reasonable grounds for
                               believing that the disclosure falls within
                               paragraphs (a), (b) or (c).

                 		 (5) In this section–

                           (a) “research purposes” includes statistical or
                               historical purposes; and

                           (b) “the relevant conditions” means the conditions
                               that the data–

                                (i)    is not processed to support measures
                                       or decisions with respect to particular
                                       individuals; and

                                (ii)   is not processed in such a way that
                                       substantial damage or substantial
                                       distress is, or is likely to be, caused to
                                       any data subject.

      37. Personal data which falls within the definition of “data”

     in section 2 (e) is exempt from Parts II, III, IV and VI.


38. Personal data is exempt from Parts II, III, IV and VI          
                                                                   
where the data consists of information which the data controller 
is obliged by or under any enactment to make available to          
                                                                   
the public, whether by publishing it, by making it available
for inspection, or otherwise and whether gratuitously or on
payment of a fee.

39.–(1) Personal data is exempt from the non-disclosure            
                                                                   
provisions where the disclosure is required by or under any        
enactment, by any rule of law or by the order of a court of        
                                                                   
competent jurisdiction.                                          

		 (2) Personal data is exempt from the non-disclosure
provisions where the disclosure is necessary–

           (a) for the purpose of, or in connection with, any
               legal proceedings including prospective legal
               proceedings; or

           (b) for the purpose of obtaining legal advice,

or is otherwise necessary for the purposes of establishing,
exercising or defending legal rights.

40. Personal data is exempt from Parts II, III, IV and VI         
                                                                  
where the exemption is required for the purpose of avoiding
an infringement of the privileges of either House of the
National Assembly.

41. Personal data is exempt from the subject information         
                                                                  
provisions where the data consists of information in respect       
of which a claim to legal professional privilege could be
maintained in legal proceedings.

42. Personal data processed by an individual only for the         
                                                                   
purposes of that individual’s personal, family or household
affairs including recreational purposes, is exempt from Parts
II, III, IV and VI.


   43. Personal data is exempt from section 11 where it consists

       of a reference given or to be given in confidence by the data
      controller for the purposes of–

                           (a) the education, training or employment,
                               or prospective education, training or
                               employment, of the data subject;

                           (b) the appointment, or prospective appointment,
                               of the data subject to any office; or

                           (c) the provision, or prospective provision, by
                               the data subject of any service.

  44. Personal data is exempt from the subject information
                provisions to the extent to which the application of those
                provisions would be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness
                of any of the armed forces of the Crown.

        45. Personal data processed for the purposes of–


                           (a) assessing any person’s suitability for judicial
                               office; or

                           (b) the conferring by the Crown of any honour
                               or dignity,

                is exempt from the subject information provisions.

  46. The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette,

       exempt from the subject information provisions personal
                data processed for the purposes of assessing any person’s
                suitability for–

                           (a) employment in the public service; or

                           (b) any office to which appointments are made
                               by the Governor-General or by a Minister.


47.–(1) Where personal data is processed for the purposes         Corporate
                                                                  finance.
of, or in connection with, a corporate finance service–

          (a) the data is exempt from the subject information
              provisions to the extent to which either–

               (i)    the application of those provisions to
                      the data could affect the price of any
                      instrument which is already in existence
                      or is to be or may be created; or

               (ii)   the data controller reasonably believes
                      that the application of those provisions
                      to the data could affect the price of any
                      such instrument; and

          (b) to the extent that the data is not exempt from
              the subject information provisions by virtue of
              paragraph (a), the data is exempt from those
              provisions where the exemption is required
              for the purpose of safeguarding an important
              economic or financial interest of Belize.

		 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(b) the Minister
may by Order published in the Gazette specify–

          (a) matters to be taken into account in
              determining whether exemption from the
              subject information provisions is required
              for the purpose of safeguarding an important
              economic or financial interest of Belize; or

          (b) circumstances in which exemption from those
              provisions is, or is not, to be taken to be
              required for that purpose.

		 (3) In this section–


                           (a) “corporate finance service” means a service
                               consisting of–

                                (i)     underwriting in respect of issues of, or
                                        the placing of issues of, any instrument;

                                (ii)    advice to undertakings on capital
                                        structure, industrial strategy and
                                        related matters and advice and service
                                        relating to mergers and the purchase
                                        of undertakings; or
                                (iii)   services relating to such underwriting
                                        as is mentioned in paragraph (a); and

                           (b) “price” includes value.

    48. Personal data which consists of records of the intentions


                of the data controller in relation to any negotiations with the
                data subject is exempt from the subject information provisions
                in any case to the extent to which the application of those
                provisions would be likely to prejudice those negotiations.

   49.–(1) The results of an examination are exempt from
                section 11.

                		 (2) Personal data consisting of information recorded
                by candidates during an academic, professional or other
                examination is exempt from section 11.

                		 (3) In this section “examination” includes any process
                for determining the knowledge, intelligence, skill or ability
                of a candidate by reference to his performance in any test,
                work or other activity.

       50.–(1) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette,

 exempt from the subject information provisions personal data
          consisting of information, the disclosure of which is prohibited
                or restricted by or under any enactment, where and to the


extent that he considers it necessary for the prohibition or
restriction to prevail for the purpose of safeguarding–

           (a) the interests of the data subject; or

           (b) the rights and freedoms of any other individual,

		 (2) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette,
exempt from the non-disclosure provisions any disclosures
of personal data made in circumstances specified in the
Order, where he considers the exemption is necessary for
the safeguarding of the interests of the data subject or the
rights and freedoms of any other person.

   (3) Any Order made under this section shall be subject to
negative resolution.

                          PART VI

                        Data Sharing

51.–(1) In accordance with the provisions of this Part, agencies   Agencies
are authorised to share personal information in accordance         to share
                                                                   information.
with an approved information sharing agreement to facilitate
the provision of public services.

		 (2) An information sharing agreement may–

           (a) duplicate an information sharing provision
               by providing for an agency to share the
               same personal information specified in the
               information sharing provision–

                (i)    with the same agencies specified in the
                       information sharing provision; and

                (ii)   for the same purposes specified in the
                       information sharing provision;

      (b) extend an information sharing provision
          that is not a restricted information sharing
          provision by providing for an agency to share
          the same personal information specified in the
          information sharing provision–

           (i)     with the same agencies specified in the
                   information sharing provision for a
                   purpose not specified in the information
                   sharing provision;

           (ii)    with an agency not specified in the
                   information sharing provision for a
                   purpose specified in the information
                   sharing provision; or

           (iii)   with an agency not specified in the
                   information sharing provision and for a
                   purpose not specified in the information
                   sharing provision;

      (c) duplicate a restricted information sharing
          provision by providing for an agency to share
          the same personal information as specified in
          the restricted information sharing provision–

           (i)     with the same agencies specified in
                   the restricted information sharing
                   provision; and

           (ii)    for the same purposes specified in
                   the restricted information sharing
                   provision; or

      (d) extend in any manner specified in paragraph
          (b) a restricted information sharing provision,
          but only if–


               (i)    the restricted information sharing
                      provision is an information matching
                      provision; or

               (ii)   there is express statutory authorisation
                      to do so.

		 (3) In this section–

          (a) “information sharing provision” means a
              provision in any enactment other than this
              Act that authorises or requires the sharing
              of personal information by an agency with
              one or more other agencies for one or more
              specified purposes; or

          (b) “restricted information sharing provision”
              means an information sharing provision that
              expressly restricts the purposes for which the
              personal information may be shared to those
              purposes specified.

52. For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in this Part–          
                                                                
                                                               
          (a) limits the collection, use, or disclosure of       
              personal information that is authorised or        

              required by or under any enactment; or

          (b) compels agencies to enter into an information
              sharing agreement if those agencies are already
              allowed to share personal information–

               (i)    by or under any other enactment; or

               (ii)   because an exemption from or a
                      modification to one or more of the
                      Data Privacy Principles or any code
                      of practice is not required to make the
                      sharing of the information lawful.


                                            PART VII

                              Data Controller and Data Processor

       53.–(1) A data controller shall demonstrate compliance with
                  the mechanisms in this Part which the data controllers use
                  to identify, assess and mitigate risks to personal data.

                  		(2) A data controller or data processer shall abide
                  with any code of conduct made under section 72 or any
                  certification mechanism put in place by which a data controller
                  can demonstrate appropriate technical and organisational
                  measures.

   54.–(1) A data controller shall implement the appropriate
     technical and organisational measures to ensure that

                  processing is performed in accordance with this Act, taking
                  into consideration the nature, scope, context and purposes
                  of processing, as well as the risks of varying likelihood and
                  severity to the rights and freedoms of individuals.

                  		(2) Where proportionate in relation to processing
                  activities, the measures referred to in sub-section (1) shall
                  include the implementation of appropriate data protection
                  policies by the data controller.

  55.–(1) A data controller shall, at the time of the determination

       of the means for processing and at the time of the processing
                  itself, implement appropriate technical and organisational
                  measures designed to implement the principles set out
                  in section 4 in an effective manner and to integrate the
                  necessary safeguards into the processing in order to meet
                  the requirements of this Act and protect the rights of data
                  subjects, taking into consideration the cost of implementation
                  and the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as
                  well as the risks of varying likelihood and severity for rights
                  and freedoms of individuals posed by the processing.


		 (2) A data controller shall implement the appropriate
technical and organisational measures for ensuring that, by
default, only personal data which are necessary for each
specific purpose of the processing is processed.

		 (3) Sub-section (2) applies to the amount of personal data
collected, the extent of processing of the personal data, the
period of storage of the personal data and the accessibility
to the personal data.

		 (4) The technical and organisational measures referred
to in sub-section (1) shall ensure that personal data is not, by
default, made accessible without the individual’s intervention
to an indefinite number of individuals.

56.–(1) Where processing is to be carried out on behalf of        
a data controller, the data controller shall only use a data
processor who shall implement the appropriate technical and
organisational measures to ensure that processing shall–

           (a) be in accordance with the requirements of
               this Act; and

           (b) ensure the protection of the rights of the data
               subject.

		(2) A data processor shall not engage another data
processor without prior specific or general written
authorisation of the data controller.

		 (3) Where there is general written authorisation pursuant
to sub-section (2), a data processor shall inform the data
controller of any intended changes concerning the addition or
replacement of other data processors and the data controller
shall be given the opportunity to object to such changes.

		 (4) Processing by a data processor shall be governed by
a written contract between the data processor and the data
controller which sets out the following–


                (a) the subject-matter and duration of the
                    processing;

                (b) the nature and purpose of the processing;

                (c) the type of personal data and categories of
                    data subjects; or

                (d) the obligations and rights of the data controller.

      		 (5) A contract prepared pursuant to sub-section (4) shall
      also stipulate that the data processor–

                (a) processes the personal data only on
                    documented instructions from the data
                    controller, including with regard to transfers
                    of personal data to countries outside of Belize
                    or an international organisation, unless
                    required to do so by any enactment and in
                    such a case, the data processor shall inform
                    the data controller of that legal requirement
                    before processing, unless the enactment
                    prohibits such information to be shared on
                    grounds of public interest;

                (b) ensures that persons authorised to process the
                    personal data have committed themselves to
                    confidentiality or are under an appropriate
                    statutory obligation of confidentiality;

                (c) takes all measures required pursuant to section
                    58.

                (d) respects the conditions referred to in sub-
                    sections (2) and (7) for engaging another data
                    processor;

                (e) taking into account the nature of the
                    processing, assists the data controller by


               appropriate technical and organisational
               measures, insofar as this is possible, for the
               fulfilment of the data controller’s obligation
               to respond to requests for exercising the data
               subject’s rights under Part III;

          (f) assists the data controller in ensuring
              compliance with the obligations pursuant to
              sections 58 to 62, taking into account the nature
              of processing and the information available
              to the data processor;

          (g) on the determination of the data controller,
              deletes or returns all the personal data to the
              data controller after the end of the provision
              of services relating to processing, and deletes
              existing copies unless the enactment requires
              storage of the personal data; or

          (h) makes available to the data controller all
              information necessary to demonstrate
              compliance with the obligations set out in this
              section and allow for and contribute to audits,
              including inspections, conducted by the data
              controller or another auditor mandated by the
              data controller.

		 (6) Where in relation to sub-section (5)(h) an instruction
from the data controller to the data processor infringes this
Act, the data processor shall immediately inform the data
controller.

		 (7) Where a data processor engages another data processor
for carrying out specific processing activities on behalf of
the data controller in accordance with sub-section (2), the
same obligations as set out in the contract between the data
controller and the data processor as referred to sub-sections
(5) and (6) shall be imposed on that other data processor,


                  in particular providing sufficient guarantees to implement
                  appropriate technical and organisational measures in such
                  a manner that the processing will meet the requirements of
                  this Act.
                  		 (8) Where that other data processor mentioned in sub-
                  section (7) fails to fulfil its data protection obligations, the
                  initial data processor referred to in sub-section (7) shall remain
                  fully liable to the data controller for the performance of that
                  other data processor’s obligations.

                  		 (9) The Commissioner with the approval of the Minister
                  may prescribe standard contractual clauses for the matters
                  referred to in sub-sections (5) and (7).

                  		 (10) Where a data processor contravenes this Act by
                  determining the purposes and means of processing, the data
                  processor shall be considered to be a data controller in respect
                  of that processing.

        57.–(1) A data processor and any person acting under the


                  authority of the data controller or of the data processor, who
     has access to personal data, shall not process that data except


                  on instructions from the data controller, unless required to
                  do so by any enactment.

                  		 (2) A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits
                  an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of
                  twenty thousand dollars .

       58.–(1) A data controller and, where applicable, the data
     controller’s representative, shall maintain a record of

                  processing activities under its responsibility and that record
                  shall contain the following–

                             (a) the name and contact details of the data
                                 controller and, where applicable, any joint data
                                 controller, the data controller’s representative
                                 and the data privacy officer;


          (b) the purposes of the processing;

          (c) a description of the categories of data subjects
              and of the categories of personal data;

          (d) the categories of recipients to whom the
              personal data has been or will be disclosed
              including recipients in other countries or
              international organisations;

          (e) where applicable, transfers of personal
              data to another country or an international
              organisation, including the identification of
              that country or international organisation and,
              in the case of transfers referred to in section
              27, the documentation of suitable safeguards;

          (f) where possible, the envisaged time limits for
              erasure of the different categories of data; or

          (g) where possible, a general description of the
              technical and organisational security measures
              referred to in section 58(1).

		 (2) A data processor and, where applicable, the data
processor’s representative, shall maintain a record of all
categories of processing activities carried out on behalf of a
data controller, which contains–

          (a) the name and contact details of the data
              processor or data processors and of each
              data controller on behalf of whom the data
              processor is acting, and, where applicable, of
              the data controller’s or the data processor’s
              representative, and the data privacy officer;

          (b) the categories of processing carried out on
              behalf of each data controller;


                          (c) where applicable, transfers of personal
                              data to another country or an international
                              organisation, including the identification of
                              that country or international organisation and,
                              in the case of transfers referred to in section
                              27, the documentation of suitable safeguards;
                              or

                          (d) where possible, a general description of the
                              technical and organisational security measures
                              referred to in section 58(1).


.   59. A data controller and a data processor and, where
                applicable, their representatives, shall cooperate, on request,
                with the Commissioner in the performance of his tasks.


                60.–(1) Taking into account the costs of implementation
                and the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing
                as well as the risk of varying likelihood and severity for
                the rights and freedoms of individuals, a data controller
                and a data processor shall implement appropriate technical
                and organisational measures to ensure a level of security
                appropriate to the risk, including–

                          (a) the pseudonymisation and encryption of
                              personal data;

                          (b) the ability to ensure the ongoing confidentiality,
                              integrity, availability and resilience of
                              processing systems and services;

                          (c) the ability to restore the availability and access
                              to personal data in a timely manner in the
                              event of a physical or technical incident; or

                          (d) a process for regularly testing, assessing
                              and evaluating the effectiveness of technical
                              and organisational measures for ensuring the
                              security of the processing.


		 (2) In assessing the appropriate level of security, account
shall be taken in particular of the risks that are presented
by processing, in particular from accidental or unlawful
destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of,
or access to personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise
processed.

		 (3) A data controller and data processor shall take steps
to ensure that any individual acting under the authority of that
data controller or data processor who has access to personal
data does not process the personal data except on instructions
from the data controller, unless he is required to do so by
any enactment.

61.–(1) Where there is a personal data breach, a data              
                                                                  
controller shall, without undue delay and, where feasible,         
not later than seventy two hours after having become aware        
                                                                   
of it, notify the Commissioner of the personal data breach,
unless the personal data breach is unlikely to result in a risk
to the rights and freedoms of an individual.

		 (2) Where the notification of a personal data breach to
the Commissioner is not made within seventy two hours, the
notification shall be accompanied by reasons for the delay.

		 (3) A data processor shall, without undue delay, notify
the data controller of a personal data breach, after becoming
aware of a personal data breach.

		(4) A notification of a personal data breach to the
Commissioner referred to in sub-section (1) shall–

           (a) describe the nature of the personal data breach
               including where possible, the categories
               and approximate number of data subjects
               concerned and the categories and approximate
               number of personal data records concerned;


                           (b) communicate the name and contact details of
                               the data privacy officer or other contact point
                               where more information can be obtained;

                           (c) describe the likely consequences of the
                               personal data breach; and

                           (d) describe the measures taken or proposed to
                               be taken by the data controller to address
                               the personal data breach, including, where
                               appropriate, measures to mitigate its possible
                               adverse effects.

                		 (5) Where it is not possible to provide all the information
                required under sub-section (4) at the same time, the information
                may be provided in phases.

                		 (6) A data controller shall document any personal data
                breaches, comprising the facts relating to the personal data
                breach, its effects and the remedial action taken in order to
                facilitate the Commissioner in his assessment of the data
                controller’s compliance with this section.



                62.–(1) Where a personal data breach is likely to result in
     a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, a data


                controller shall notify the data subject of the personal data
                breach without undue delay and, where feasible, not later
                than seventy hours after having become aware of it.

                		 (2) A notification under sub-section (1) shall describe
                in clear and plain language the nature of the personal data
                breach and contain the information referred to in section
                61(4)(b), (c) and (d).

                		 (3) A notification under sub-section (1) shall not be
                required where any of the following conditions are met–

                           (a) the data controller has implemented
                               appropriate technical and organisational


                protection measures, and those measures
                were applied to the personal data affected by
                the personal data breach, in particular those
                that render the personal data unintelligible to
                any person who is not authorised to access
                it, such as encryption;

          (b) the data controller has taken subsequent
              measures which ensure that the high risk
              to the rights and freedoms of data subjects
              referred to in sub-section (1) is no longer
              likely to materialise; or

          (c) it would involve disproportionate effort
              and in such a case, there shall be a public
              communication or similar measure whereby
              the data subjects are informed in an equally
              effective manner.

63. –(1) Where a type of processing, in particular processing     
using new technologies, and taking into account the nature,       
                                                                 
scope, context and purposes of the processing, is likely
to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of an
individual, a data controller shall, prior to the processing,
carry out a data protection impact assessment of the impact
of the envisaged processing operations on the protection of
personal data.

		 (2) A data protection impact assessment pursuant to
sub-section (1) may address a set of similar processing
operations that present similar high risks.

		 (3) A data controller shall seek the advice of a data
privacy officer when carrying out a data protection impact
assessment.

    (4) A data protection impact assessment referred to in
sub-section (1) shall in particular be required in the case of–


                (a) a systematic and extensive evaluation of
                    personal aspects relating to individuals which
                    is based on automated processing, including
                    profiling, and on which decisions are based
                    that produce legal effects concerning an
                    individual or similarly significantly affect the
                    individual;

                (b) processing on a large scale of sensitive personal
                    data; or

                (c) a systematic monitoring of a publicly accessible
                    area on a large scale.

      		 (5) The Commissioner shall establish and make public
      a list of the kind of processing operations which are subject
      to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment
      pursuant to sub-section (1) and the Commissioner shall
      publish that list in the Gazette.

      		(6) The Commissioner shall establish and make
      public a list of the kind of processing operations where
      no data protection impact assessment is required and the
      Commissioner shall publish that list in the Gazette.

      		 (7) A data protection impact assessment referred to in
      sub-section (1) shall contain ‑

                (a) systematic description of the envisaged
                    processing operations and the purposes of
                    the processing, including, where applicable,
                    the legitimate interest pursued by the data
                    controller;

                (b) an assessment of the necessity and
                    proportionality of the processing operations
                    in relation to the purposes;

                (c) an assessment of the risks to the rights and
                    freedoms of data subjects referred to in sub-
                    section (1); and


          (d) the measures envisaged to address the risks,
              including safeguards, security measures
              and mechanisms to ensure the protection of
              personal data and to demonstrate compliance
              with this Act, taking into account the rights
              and legitimate interests of data subjects and
              other persons concerned.

		 (8) Where appropriate, a data controller shall seek the
views of data subjects or their representatives on the intended
processing, without prejudice to the protection of commercial
or public interests or the security of processing operations.

		 (9) Where necessary, a data controller shall carry out
a review to assess if processing is performed in accordance
with the data protection impact assessment at least when there
is a change of the risk represented by processing operations.

64.–(1) A data controller shall consult the Commissioner        
                                                                 
prior to processing, where a data protection impact assessment
under section 63 indicates that the processing would result in
a high risk to the rights and freedoms of an individual in the
absence of measures taken by the data controller to mitigate
the risk.

		 (2) Where the Commissioner is of the opinion that the
intended processing referred to in sub-section (1) would
infringe this Act, in particular where the data controller
has insufficiently identified or mitigated the risk, the
Commissioner shall, within a period of up to eight weeks
of receipt of the request for consultation, provide written
advice to the data controller and, where applicable to the
data processor.

		 (3) The period mentioned under sub-section (2) may be
extended up to six weeks, taking into account the complexity
of the intended processing.


              		 (4) The Commissioner shall inform the data controller
              and, where applicable, the data processor, of any extension
              within one month of receipt of the request for consultation
              together with the reasons for the delay.
              		 (5) The period mentioned under sub-section (2) may be
              suspended until the Commissioner has obtained information
              he has requested for the purposes of the consultation.

              		 (6) When consulting the Commissioner pursuant to sub-
              section (1), the data controller shall provide the Commissioner
              with–

                        (a) where applicable, the respective responsibilities
                            of the data controller and data processors
                            involved in the processing, in particular for
                            processing within a group of undertakings;

                        (b) the purposes and means of the intended
                            processing;

                        (c) the measures and safeguards provided to
                            protect the rights and freedoms of data subjects
                            pursuant to this Act;

                        (d) where applicable, the contact details of the
                            data privacy officer;

                        (e) the data protection impact assessment provided
                            for in section 63; or

                        (f) any other information requested by the
                            Commissioner.

Designation   65.–(1) A data controller and data processor shall designate
of the data
privacy
              a data privacy officer in any case where–
officer.
                        (a) the processing is carried out by a public
                             authority or body, except when carried out
                             by a court of competent jurisdiction acting in
                             their judicial capacity;


          (b) the core activities of the data controller or
              the data processor consist of processing
              operations which, by virtue of their nature,
              their scope and their purposes, require regular
              and systematic monitoring of data subjects on
              a large scale; or

          (c) the core activities of the data controller or
              the data processor consist of processing on
              a large scale of sensitive personal data.

		 (2) A group of undertakings may appoint a single data
privacy officer provided that a data privacy officer is easily
accessible from each establishment.

		 (3) Where a data controller or the data processor is a
public authority or body, a single data privacy officer may
be designated for several such authorities or bodies, taking
account of their organisational structure and size.

    (4) In cases other than those referred to in sub-section
(1), a data controller or data processor or associations and
other bodies representing categories of data controllers or
data processors may designate a data privacy officer.

    (5) A data privacy officer shall be designated on the basis
of professional qualities and, in particular, expert knowledge
of data protection law and practices and the ability to fulfil
the duties and functions referred to in section 67.

		 (6) A data privacy officer may be a staff member of
the data controller or data processor, or fulfil the tasks on
the basis of a service contract.

		(7) A data controller or the data processor shall
communicate the contact details of the data privacy officer
to the Commissioner.

   66.–(1) A data controller and A data processor shall ensure

        that a data privacy officer is involved, properly and in a
                  timely manner, in all issues which relate to the protection
                  of personal data.
                  		 (2) A data controller and data processor shall support the
                  data privacy officer in performing the duties and functions
                  referred to in section 67, by providing resources necessary
                  to carry out those tasks and access to personal data and
                  processing operations, and to maintain his expert knowledge.

                  		 (3) A data privacy officer shall not be dismissed or
                  penalised by the data controller or the data processor for
                  performing duties and functions referred to in section 67.

                  		 (4) A data privacy officer shall report directly to highest
                  management level of a data controller or a data processor.

                  		 (5) Data subjects may contact a data privacy officer with
                  regard to all issues related to processing of their personal
                  data and to the exercise of their rights under this Act.

                  		 (6) A data privacy officer is required to keep confidential
                  all matters concerning the performance of his duties and
                  functions referred to in section 67.

        67.–(1) A data privacy officer shall–


                    (a) inform and advise the data controller or the
                                data processor and the employees who carry
                                out processing of their obligations pursuant
                                to this Act;

                            (b) monitor compliance with this Act and with the
                                policies of the data controller or data processor
                                in relation to the protection of personal data,
                                including the assignment of responsibilities,
                                awareness-raising and training of staff involved
                                in processing operations, and the related audits;


          (c) provide advice where requested as regards
              the data protection impact assessment and
              monitor its performance pursuant to section
              63;

          (d) cooperate with the Commissioner; or

          (e) act as the contact point for the Commissioner
              on issues relating to processing, including
              the prior consultation referred to in section
              64, and to consult, where appropriate, with
              regard to any other matter.

		 (2) A data privacy officer shall in the performance of
his duties and functions under this section have due regard
to the risk associated with processing operations, taking into
account the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing.

                        PART VIII

              Data Protection Commissioner

68.–(1) There shall be a public officer in the Ministry         
                                                                 
responsible for digital transformation, e-governance or
information technology, to be called the Data Protection
Commissioner, who shall be responsible for the general
administration of this Act.

		 (2) A person is qualified to hold or to act in the post
of Data Protection Commissioner, where that person has
specializations or experience in the fields of law, cyberlaw,
telecommunications law, economics, finance, information
security or technology for periods amounting in the aggregate
to not less than seven years.

		 (3) The Data Protection Commissioner shall at all times
act independently and remain free from external influence.

   69. Without prejudice to the generality of the functions set

                out in this Act, the Commissioner shall perform the following
                functions–

                          (a) monitor and enforce the application of this
                              Act;

                          (b) promote public awareness and understanding
                              of the risks, rules, safeguards and rights in
                              relation to processing;

                          (c) promote the awareness of the obligations of
                              data controllers and data processors under this
                              Act;

                          (d) organise activities addressed specifically to
                              children to educate them about the risks, rules,
                              safeguards and rights in relation to processing;

                          (e) conduct, at his own discretion or where
                              requested to do so by any person, an audit
                              of the personal data processed by the person,
                              for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not
                              the data is processed in accordance with this
                              Act;

                          (f) upon request, provide information to any data
                              subject concerning the exercise of their rights
                              under this Act;

                          (g) monitor the processing of personal data and,
                              in particular, sensitive personal data, and any
                              other matter affecting the privacy of persons
                              in respect of their personal data, and–

                               (i)    report to the Minister on the results of
                                      that monitoring; and


               (ii)   where appropriate, make
                      recommendations on the need for,
                      or desirability of, taking legislative,
                      administrative or other action to give
                      protection or better protection, to the
                      privacy of persons in respect of their
                      personal data;

          (h) examine any proposed legislation or proposed
              policy of the Government that–

               (i)    the Commissioner considers may affect
                      the privacy of persons in respect of their
                      personal data; or

               (ii)   provides for the collection of personal
                      data by any public authority or the
                      disclosure of personal data by one public
                      authority to another public authority,

              and report to the Minister the results of that
              examination;

          (i) conduct investigations on the application of
              this Act, including on the basis of information
              received from a public authority;

          (j) receive and invite representations from
              members of the public on any matter affecting
              the privacy of persons in respect of their
              personal data;

          (k) consult and cooperate with other persons
              concerned with the privacy of persons in
              respect of their personal data;

          (l) make suggestions to any person in relation to
              any matter that concerns the need for, or the
              desirability of, action by that person in the
              interest of the privacy of persons in respect
              of their personal data;


      (m) provide, at his own discretion or where
          requested to do so, advice to any Minister,
          public authority or person on any matter
          relevant to the operation of this Act;

      (n) inquire generally into any matter, including
          any law, practice or procedure, whether
          governmental or non-governmental, or any
          technical development, where it appears to
          the Commissioner that the privacy of persons
          in respect of their personal data is being or
          may be infringed thereby;

      (o) undertake research into, and monitor
          developments in, data processing and computer
          technology to ensure that any adverse effects of
          such developments on the privacy of persons
          in respect of their personal data is minimised,
          and report to the Minister the results of such
          research and monitoring;

      (p) report to the Minister on the desirability of
          the acceptance, by Belize, of any international
          instrument relating to the privacy of persons
          in respect of their personal data;

      (q) monitor relevant developments, insofar as
          they have an impact on the protection of
          personal data, in particular the development of
          information and communication technologies
          and commercial practices;

      (r) prepare appropriate codes of practice for the
          guidance of persons processing personal data;

      (s) recommend the adoption and development of
          standard contractual clauses and standard data
          protection clauses pursuant to this Act;


           (t) establish and maintain a list in relation to
               the requirement for data protection impact
               assessment pursuant to section 63(5) and (6);

           (u) investigate complaints from persons
               concerning abuses in the processing of
               personal data;

           (v) approve binding corporate rules pursuant to
               section 26;

           (w) keep internal records of contraventions of this
               Act and of measures taken to address those
               contraventions;

           (x) do anything incidental or conducive to the
               performance of any of the preceding functions;
               or

           (y) exercise such other functions as are conferred
               or imposed on the Commissioner by or under
               this Act or any other enactment.

70.–(1) There shall be appointed by the Public Services            Staff.

Commission to assist the Commissioner in the discharge
of his functions such number of public officers as may be
required.

		 (2) A person appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) is
subject to the Commissioner’s direction and control in the
performance of functions under this Act.

71.–(1) The Commissioner and a public officer appointed            
                                                                  
pursuant to section 70(1) shall keep secret all confidential
information coming to his knowledge during the course
of the administration of this Act or any other Act that the
Commissioner has jurisdiction to administer or enforce,
except insofar as disclosure is necessary for the administration
of this Act or insofar as the Commissioner authorises that
person to release the information.


             		 (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply where disclosure is
             required pursuant to–

                       (a) an order made by a court of competent
                           jurisdiction;

                       (b) a duty or obligation imposed by any enactment;
                           or

                       (c) an international agreement to which Belize is
                           a party.

             		 (3) A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits
             an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of
             twenty thousand dollars.

             		 (4) In this section, “confidential information” means
             information of any kind and in any form that relates to
             one or more persons and that is obtained by or on behalf
             of the Commissioner for the purpose of administering or
             enforcing this Act or any enactment that the Commissioner
             has jurisdiction to administer or enforce, or that is prepared
             from such information, but does not include information
             that does not directly or indirectly reveal the identity of the
             person to whom it relates.

   72. The Commissioner and his staff shall not be subject to
             any action, claim or demand by, or liability to, any person
             in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in good
             faith in the discharge or in connection with the discharge of
             the functions conferred on the Commissioner and his staff
             pursuant to this Act.

      73. –(1) The Commissioner shall, not later than three months
             after the end of each financial year, submit to the Minister a
             report of the activities and operations of the Commissioner
             throughout the preceding financial year in such detail as the
             Minister may direct.


(2) A copy of the report of the Commissioner referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be printed and laid before both Houses of
the National Assembly and published in the Gazette not later
than three months from the date of receipt by the Minister.

                          PART IX

                         Enforcement

74.–(1) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that a data           
controller or a data processor has contravened this Act, the       
Commissioner may serve him with an Enforcement Notice,
requiring the data controller or data processor, as the case
may be, to–

           (a) take, within such time as may be specified in
               the notice, such steps as are specified in the
               Enforcement Notice;

           (b) refrain from taking, after such time as may
               be so specified, such steps as are so specified
               in the Enforcement Notice; or

           (c) refrain from processing any personal data, or
               any personal data of a description specified in
               the notice, or to refrain from processing the
               personal data for a purpose so specified or in
               a manner so specified, after such time in the
               Enforcement Notice.

		 (2) In deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice,
the Commissioner shall consider whether the contravention
has caused or is likely to cause damage or distress to a person.

		 (3) An Enforcement Notice shall contain–

           (a) the provision of the Act that is contravened
               with particulars of the offence; and


                            (b) particulars of the right of appeal conferred
                                by section 89.

                  		 (4) Subject to sub-sections (5) and (6), an Enforcement
                  Notice shall not require any of the provisions of the
                  Enforcement Notice to be complied with before the end of
                  the period within which an appeal can be brought against
                  the notice and, where such an appeal is brought, the notice
                  need not be complied with pending the determination or
                  withdrawal of the appeal.

                  		(5) Where by reason of special circumstances the
                  Commissioner considers that an Enforcement Notice should
                  be complied with as a matter of urgency he may include
                  in the Enforcement Notice a statement to that effect and a
                  statement of his reasons for reaching that conclusion.

                  		 (6) Where sub-section (5) applies, the notice shall not
                  require the provisions of the Enforcement Notice to be
                  complied with before the end of the period of seven days
                  beginning with the day on which the notice is served.

   75.–(1) Where the Commissioner considers that all or any


                  of the provisions of an Enforcement Notice need not be
          complied with in order to ensure compliance with this Act,
                  he may cancel or vary the enforcement notice by written
                  notice to the person on whom it was served.

                  		 (2) A person on whom an enforcement notice has been
                  served may, at any time after the expiry of the period during
                  which an appeal can be brought against that Enforcement
                  Notice, apply in writing to the Commissioner for the
                  cancellation or variation of the notice on the ground that,
                  by reason of a change of circumstances, all or any of the
                  provisions of the Enforcement Notice need not be complied
                  with in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of
                  this Act to which the Enforcement Notice relates.


76.–(1) A request may be made to the Commissioner by or         
                                                                
on behalf of any person who is, or believes himself to be,
directly affected by any processing of personal data, for an
assessment as to whether processing is in compliance with
this Act.

		(2) On receiving a request under this section, the
Commissioner shall make an assessment in such manner as
appears to him to be appropriate, unless he is not supplied
with such information as he may reasonably require to–

          (a) satisfy himself as to the identity of the person
               making the request; and

          (b) enable him to identify the processing in
              question.

   (3) The matters to which the Commissioner may have
regard in determining in what manner it is appropriate to
make an assessment include–

          (a) the extent to which the request appears to him
              to raise a matter of substance;

          (b) any undue delay in making the request; and

          (c) whether or not the person making the request
              has a right to access the personal data in
              question as specified in section 11.

		(4) Where the Commissioner has received a request
under this section he shall notify the person who made the
request–

          (a) whether he has made an assessment as a result
              of the request; and

          (b) to the extent that he considers appropriate,
              having regard in particular to any exemption


                             from section 11 applying in relation to the
                             personal data concerned, of any view formed
                             or action taken as a result of the request.

Information   77.–(1) Where the Commissioner–
notice.

                        (a) has received a request under section 76 in
                            respect of any processing of personal data; or

                        (b) reasonably requires any information for
                            the purpose of determining whether a data
                            controller has complied or is complying with
                            the data protection principles,

              he may serve the data controller with an Information Notice,
              requiring the data controller to furnish him with specified
              information relating to the request or to compliance with the
              provisions of this Act.

              		 (2) An Information Notice shall contain–

                        (a) in a case falling within–

                             (i)    sub-section (1)(a), a statement that the
                                    Commissioner has received a request
                                    under section 76 in relation to the
                                    specified processing; or

                             (ii)   sub-section (1)(b), a statement that the
                                    Commissioner regards the specified
                                    information as relevant for the purpose
                                    of determining whether the data
                                    controller or the data processor has
                                    complied or is complying with the
                                    provisions of this Act and his reasons
                                    for regarding it as relevant for that
                                    purpose; and


          (b) particulars of the right of appeal conferred by
              section 89.

		 (3) The Commissioner may specify in an Information
Notice–

          (a) the form in which the information shall be
              furnished; and

          (b) the period within which, or the time and place
              at which, the information shall be furnished.

		 (4) Subject to sub-section (5) and (6), a period specified
in an Information Notice under sub-section (3)(b) shall not
end, and a time so specified shall not fall, before the end of
the period within which an appeal can be brought against the
Information Notice and, where such an appeal is brought, the
information shall not be furnished pending the determination
or withdrawal of the appeal.

		(5) Where by reason of special circumstances the
Commissioner considers that the information is required as a
matter of urgency, he may include in the Information Notice
a statement to that effect and a statement of his reasons for
reaching that conclusion and in that event sub-section (4)
shall not apply, but the Information Notice shall not require
the information to be furnished before the end of the period
of seven days beginning with the day on which the notice is
served.

		 (6) A person shall not be required by virtue of this section
to furnish the Commissioner with any information in respect
of–

          (a) any communication between a professional
              legal adviser and his client in connection with
              the giving of legal advice to the client with
              respect to his obligations, liabilities or rights
              under this Act; or


                (b) any communication between a professional
                     legal adviser and his client, or between such
                     an adviser or his client and any other person,
                     made in connection with or in contemplation of
                     proceedings under or arising out of this Act,
                     including proceedings before the Tribunal,
                     and for the purposes of such proceedings.

      		(7) In sub-section (6) references to the client of a
      professional legal adviser includes references to any person
      representing such a client.

      		 (8) A person shall not be required by virtue of this
      section to furnish the Commissioner with any information
      where the furnishing of that information would, by revealing
      evidence of the commission of any offence, other than an
      offence under this Act or an offence of perjury, expose that
      person to proceedings for that offence.

      		(9) Any relevant statement provided by a person in
      response to a requirement under this section may not be
      used in evidence against that person on a prosecution for an
      offence under this Act, other than an offence under section
      84, unless in the proceedings–

                (a) in giving evidence the person provides
                    information that is inconsistent with it; and

                (b) evidence relating to it is adduced, or a question
                    relating to it is asked, by that person or on
                    that person’s behalf.

      		(10) The Commissioner may cancel an Information
      Notice by written notice to the person on whom it was served.

      		 (11) This section has effect subject to section 76(3).

      		 (12) In sub-section (1), “specified information” means
      information–


          (a) specified or described in the Information
              Notice; or

          (b) falling within a category which is specified
              or described in the information notice.

		 (13) In subsection (9),“relevant statement”, in relation
to a requirement under this section, means–

          (a) an oral statement; or

          (b) a written statement made for the purposes of
              the requirement.

78.–(1) Where the Commissioner–                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
          (a) receives a request under section 76 in respect
              of any processing of personal data; or

          (b) has reasonable grounds for suspecting that,
              in a case in which proceedings have been
              stayed under section 35(3), the personal data
              to which the proceedings relate–

                (i)    is not being processed only for the
                       purposes of journalism or for artistic
                       or literary purposes; or

                (ii)   is not being processed with a view
                       to the publication by any person of
                       any journalistic, literary or artistic
                       material which has not previously been
                       published by the data controller,

he may serve the data controller with a Special Information
Notice requiring the data controller to furnish him with
specified information for the purpose specified in sub-section
(2).


      		 (2) The purpose referred to in sub-section (1) is the
      purpose of ascertaining whether personal data is being
      processed–

               (a) only for the purposes of journalism or for
                   artistic or literary purposes; or

               (b) with a view to the publication by any person
                   of any journalistic, literary or artistic material
                   which has not previously been published by
                   the data controller.

      		 (3) A Special Information Notice shall contain–

               (a) particulars of the right of appeal conferred
                   by section 89; and

               (b) in a case falling within–

                    (i)    sub-section (1)(a), a statement that the
                           Commissioner has received a request
                           under section 76 in relation to the
                           specified processing; or

                    (ii)   sub-section (1)(b), a statement of
                           the Commissioner’s grounds for
                           suspecting that the personal data is not
                           being processed as mentioned in that
                           paragraph.

      		 (4) The Commissioner may also specify in a Special
      Information Notice–

               (a) the form in which the information shall be
                   furnished; and

               (b) the period within which, or the time and place
                   at which, the information shall be furnished.


		 (5) Subject to sub-section (6), a period specified in a
Special Information Notice under sub-section (4)(b) shall not
end, and a time so specified shall not fall, before the end of
the period within which an appeal can be brought against the
notice and, if such an appeal is brought, the information need
not be furnished pending the determination or withdrawal of
the appeal.

		(6) Where by reason of special circumstances the
Commissioner considers that the information is required as a
matter of urgency, he may include in the Special Information
Notice a statement to that effect and a statement of his reasons
for reaching that conclusion and in that event sub-section
(5) shall not apply, but the Special Information Notice shall
not require the information to be furnished before the end
of the period of seven days beginning with the day on which
the notice is served.

		 (7) A person shall not be required by virtue of this
section to furnish the Commissioner with any information
in respect of–

           (a) any communication between a professional
                legal adviser and his client in connection with
                the giving of legal advice to the client with
                respect to his obligations, liabilities or rights
                under this Act; or

           (b) any communication between a professional
               legal adviser and his client, or between such
               an adviser or his client and any other person,
               made in connection with or in contemplation of
               proceedings under or arising out of this Act,
               including proceedings before the Tribunal,
               and for the purposes of such proceedings.

		(8) In sub-section (7) a reference to the client of a
professional legal adviser includes a reference to any person
representing such a client.


      		 (9) A person shall not be required by virtue of this
      section to furnish the Commissioner with any information
      where the furnishing of that information would, by revealing
      evidence of the commission of any offence, other than an
      offence under this Act or an offence of perjury, expose him
      to proceedings for that offence.

      		 (10) Any relevant statement provided by a person in
      response to a requirement under this section may not be
      used in evidence against that person on a prosecution for any
      offence under this Act, other than an offence under section
      77, unless in the proceedings–

                (a) in giving evidence the person provides
                    information inconsistent with it; and

                (b) evidence relating to it is adduced, or a question
                    relating to it is asked, by that person or on
                    that person’s behalf.

      		 (11) In sub-section (10) “relevant statement”, in relation
      to a requirement under this section, means–

                (a) an oral statement; or

                (b) a written statement made for the purposes of
                    the requirement.

         (12) The Commissioner may cancel a special information
      notice by written notice to the person on whom it was served.

      		 (13) In sub-section (1) “specified information” means
      information–

                (a) specified, or described, in the Special
                    Information Notice; or

                (b) falling within a category which is specified, or
                    described, in the Special Information Notice


79.–(1) Where at any time it appears to the Commissioner,          
                                                                   
whether as a result of the service of a Special Information       
Notice or otherwise, that any personal data is not being           
                                                                   
processed–                                                        
                                                                   
                                                                   
          (a) for the purposes of only journalism or for           
              artistic or literary purposes; or

          (b) with a view to the publication by any person
              of any journalistic, literary or artistic material
              which has not previously been published by
              the data controller,

he may make a determination in writing to that effect.

		 (2) A notice under sub-section (1) shall be given to the
data controller, and shall contain particulars of the right of
appeal conferred by section 89.

		 (3) A determination under sub-section (1) shall not take
effect until the end of the period within which an appeal can
be brought and, where an appeal is brought, shall not take
effect pending the determination or withdrawal of the appeal.

80.–(1) The Commissioner may not serve an Enforcement              
                                                                   
Notice on a data controller with respect to the processing of      
personal data for the purposes of journalism or for artistic       
                                                                   
or literary purposes unless–                                       
                                                                   
                                                                   
          (a) a determination under section 74(1) with             
              respect to that data has taken effect; and

          (b) the Supreme Court has granted leave for the
              Enforcement Notice to be served.

		 (2) The Supreme Court shall not grant leave for the
purposes of sub-section (1)(b) unless satisfied–

                          (a) that the Commissioner has reason to suspect a
                              contravention of the data protection principles
                              which is of substantial public importance; and

                          (b) except where the case is one of urgency, that
                              the data controller has been given notice of
                              the application for leave.

                		 (3) The Commissioner may not serve an Information
                Notice on a data controller with respect to the processing of
                personal data for the purposes of journalism or for artistic or
                literary purposes unless a determination under section 77(1)
                with respect to that data has taken effect.

      81.–(1) A person who fails to comply with an Enforcement
  Notice, an Information Notice or a Special Information Notice

               commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                a fine of five thousand dollars.

                		 (2) A person who, in purported compliance with an
                Information Notice–

                          (a) makes a statement which he knows to be false
                              in a material respect; or

                          (b) recklessly makes a statement which is false
                              in a material respect,

                is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary conviction
                to a fine of twenty thousand dollars.

                		 (3) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence
                under sub-section (1) to prove that he exercised all due
                diligence to comply with the notice in question.

     82.–(1) Any notice authorised or required by this Act to be
   served on or given to any person by the Commissioner may
                where the person is–

          (a) an individual, be served on him by‑

               (i)     delivering it to him;

               (ii)    sending it to him by post addressed to
                       him at his usual or last known place of
                       residence or business; or

               (iii)   leaving it for him at that place; or

          (b) a body corporate or partnership, be served on
              it by–

               (i)     sending it by post to the proper officer
                       of the company at its principal office;
                       or

               (ii)    addressing it to the proper officer of the
                       partnership and leaving it at the office
                       of the proper officer.

		 (2) This section is without prejudice to any other lawful
method of serving or giving a notice.

		(3) Nothing in subsections (1) and (2) precludes the
service of a notice by electronic means.

83.–(1) Where a Judge of the Supreme Court is satisfied by          Warrants.
information on oath supplied by the Commissioner that there
are reasonable grounds for suspecting that–

          (a) a data controller or a data processor has
              contravened or is contravening Parts II, III
              or IV; or

          (b) an offence under this Act has been or is
              being committed, and that evidence of the
              contravention or of the commission of the
              offence is to be found on any premises specified
              by the Commissioner,


               the Judge may issue a warrant.

               		(2) A warrant issued, under sub-section (1), shall
               authorise a police officer accompanied by the Commissioner,
               staff or such other person skilled in information technology
               as the police officer may deem necessary for the purpose,
               within 7 days of the date of the warrant, to–

                         (a) enter the premises;

                         (b) search the premises;

                         (c) inspect, examine, operate and test any
                             equipment found on the premises which is
                             used or intended to be used for the processing
                             of personal data;

                         (d) inspect and seize any documents or other
                             material found on the premises; or

                         (e) require any person on the premises to provide–

                               (i)    an explanation of any document or other
                                      material found on the premises; or

                               (ii)   such other information as may
                                      reasonably be required for the purpose
                                      of determining whether the data
                                      controller has contravened or is
                                      contravening Parts II, III or IV.

               		 (3) A Judge shall not issue a warrant in respect of any
               personal data processed for the purposes of journalism or
               for artistic or literary purposes unless a determination by the
               Commissioner under section 79 with respect to those data
               has taken effect.

Execution of   84.–(1) A police officer executing a warrant may use such
warrants.
               reasonable force as may be necessary.


		 (2) Where the person who occupies the premises in respect
of which a warrant is issued is present when the warrant is
executed, he shall be shown the warrant and supplied with a
copy of it and where the person is not present, a copy of the
warrant shall be left in a prominent place on the premises.

		 (3) A police officer seizing anything in pursuance of a
warrant shall make a list of any items seized with the date
and time of the seizure and shall give the list to–

          (a) the data controller; or

          (b) the occupier of the premises.

85.–(1) The powers of inspection and seizure conferred by       
                                                                 
a warrant shall not be exercisable in respect of personal data   
which, by virtue of section 31, is exempt from any of the
provisions of this Act.

		(2) The powers of inspection and seizure conferred
by a warrant shall not be exercisable in respect of any
communication between–

          (a) a professional legal adviser and his client in
              connection with the giving of legal advice
              to the client with respect to his obligations,
              liabilities or rights under this Act; or

          (b) a professional legal adviser and his client,
              or between such an adviser or his client and
              any other person, made in connection with
              or in contemplation of proceedings under or
              arising out of this Act including proceedings
              before the Tribunal and for the purposes of
              those proceedings.

86. A warrant shall be returned to the Supreme Court–           
                                                               

          (a) after being executed; or


                           (b) where not executed within the time authorised
                               for its execution,

                 and the police officer by whom any such warrant is executed
                 shall make an endorsement on it stating what powers have
                 been exercised by him under the warrant.

Obstruction of   87. Any person who–
execution of a
warrant.
                           (a) intentionally obstructs a person in the
                               execution of a warrant;

                           (b) fails without reasonable excuse to give any
                               police officer executing such a warrant such
                               assistance as he may reasonably require for
                               the execution of the warrant;

                           (c) makes a statement in response to a requirement
                               under section 83(2)(e) which that person
                               knows to be false in a material respect; or

                           (d) recklessly makes a statement in response to
                               a requirement under section 83(2)(e) which
                               is false in a material respect,

                 commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                 a fine of twenty thousand dollars.

                                          PART X

                                  Data Protection Tribunal

Establishment    88.–(1) There is established a tribunal called the Data
of the Data
Protection
                 Protection Tribunal.
Tribunal.
                 		 (2) The constitution of the Tribunal and other matters
                 relating to the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Minister
                 by Order published in the Gazette.

89.–(1) A person on whom an Enforcement Notice, an             
                                                                
Information Notice or a Special Information Notice has been
served may appeal to the Tribunal against the notice.

		 (2) A person on whom an Enforcement Notice has been
served may appeal to the Tribunal against the refusal of an
application under section 75(2) for cancellation or variation
of the notice.

		 (3) Where an Enforcement Notice, an Information Notice
or a Special Information Notice contains a statement by the
Commissioner in accordance with sections 74(3), 77(5) or
78(6) then, whether or not the person appeals against the
notice, he may appeal against–

          (a) the Commissioner’s decision to include the
              statement in the notice; or

          (b) the effect of the inclusion of the statement in
              respect of any part of the notice.

		 (4) A data controller in respect of whom a determination
has been made under section 90 may appeal to the Tribunal
against the determination.

		 (5) A person on whom an order has been made pursuant
to section 90 may appeal to the Tribunal against that order.

		 (6) A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the
Commissioner may appeal to the Tribunal against that decision.

90.–(1) Where on an appeal under section 89(1) the Tribunal      
considers–

          (a) that the notice against which the appeal is
               brought is not in accordance with this Act or
               any regulations made thereunder; or

          (b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise
              of discretion by the Commissioner, and it is


                     determined that the Commissioner ought to
                     have exercised his discretion differently,

      the Tribunal shall allow the appeal or substitute such other
      notice or decision as could have been served or made by
      the Commissioner and in any other case the Tribunal shall
      dismiss the appeal.

      		 (2) Upon appeal pursuant to sub-section (1), the Tribunal
      may review any determination of fact on which the notice in
      question was based.

      		 (3) Where on an appeal under section 89(2) the Tribunal
      considers that the Enforcement Notice ought to be cancelled
      or varied by reason of a change in circumstances, the Tribunal
      shall cancel or vary the notice.

      		 (4) On an appeal under section 89(3) the Tribunal may
      direct–

                (a) that the notice in question shall have effect as
                    if it did not contain any such statement as is
                    mentioned in that sub-section; or
                (b) that the inclusion of the statement in accordance
                    with sections 74(3), 77(5) or 78(6) shall not
                    have effect in relation to any part of the notice,
                    and may make such modifications in the notice
                    as may be required for giving effect to the
                    direction.

      		 (5) On an appeal under section 89(4), the Tribunal may
      cancel the determination of the Commissioner.

      		 (6) Any party to an appeal to the Tribunal under section
      89 may appeal the decision of the Tribunal on a point of law
      to the Supreme Court.

      		 (7) Any appeal under this Act may be brought within
      60 days of a decision given under this Act.


                          PART XI

                       Miscellaneous

91.–(1) An individual who suffers damage or distress due        
                                                                  
to any contravention of this Act by a data controller or a      
data processor is entitled to compensation from that data
controller or the data processor for that damage.

		 (2) In proceedings brought by an individual pursuant to
sub-section (1), it is a defence for the data controller or the
data processor to prove that he took all such measures in the
circumstances as would be reasonably required to comply
with the provisions of this Act.

92.–(1) A person shall not knowingly or recklessly, without     
                                                                
the consent of a data controller–                                 

          (a) obtain or disclose personal data or the
              information contained in personal data; or

          (b) procure the disclosure to another person of
              the information contained in personal data.

		 (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to a person who
shows that–

          (a) the obtaining, disclosing or procuring–

                (i)    was necessary for the purpose of
                       preventing or detecting crime; or

                (ii)   was required or authorised by or under
                       any enactment, by any rule of law or
                       by the order of a court of competent
                       jurisdiction;

          (b) he acted in the reasonable belief that he had
              in law, the right to obtain or disclose the
              data or information or, as the case may be,
              to procure the disclosure of the information
              to the other person;


                           (c) he acted in the reasonable belief that he would
                               have had the consent of the data controller, if,
                               the data controller had known of the obtaining,
                               disclosing or procuring and the circumstances
                               of it; or

                           (d) in the particular circumstances, the obtaining,
                               disclosing or procuring was justified as being
                               in the public interest.

                		 (3) A person who, contravenes sub-section (1), commits
                an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of
                ten thousand dollars.

   93. No enactment or rule of law prohibiting or restricting

                the disclosure of information shall preclude a person from
                furnishing the Commissioner or the Tribunal with any
                information necessary for the discharge of their functions
                under this Act.

      94. This Act shall bind the Crown.


   95. The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette
       amend the Schedule.

    96. The Minister may make Regulations generally for the
                purposes of giving effect to this Act.

   97. –(1) This Act comes into force on a day to be appointed
                by the Minister by Order published in the Gazette.

                		 (2) Different days may be appointed for bringing different
                provisions into force, or for bringing different purposes of
                the same provision into force.

                                        

       