
DATA PROTECTION ACT
1988
NETHERLANDS


Act of 28th December 1988, providing rules for the protection of
privacy in connection with personal data files (Data Protection Act)
(Bulletin of Acts. Orders and Decrees 1988, 665)

PART. 1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Section 1
For the purposes of this Act and the provisions based-upon it:
personal data means any information relating to an identified or
identifiable individual;
personal data file means any organized collection of personal data
relating to different persons which is operated by automated means or
is systematically disposed in such a way as ter facilitate access to
the data therein contained;
controller means the party with control over a personal data file;
processor means the party operating all or part of the hardware used
for holding a personal data file of which that party is not the
controller;
issue of data from a personal data file means the disclosure or making
available of personal data where such data are wholly or mainly derived
from data included in that personal data file or obtained by processing
such data either by itself or in conjunction with other data;

issue of data to a third party means the issue of data
from a personal data file to a person or institution outside
the organization of the controller, except where such issue
is to the processor or to the data subject;
code of conduct means a set of rules or recommendations
regarding personal data files adopted by one or more organi­
zations, which are representative of the sector which they
cover, in the interest of the protection of privacy;
Our Minister means Our Minister of Justice;
Registration Chamber means the Registration Chamber established
under section 37.

Section 2
1. This Act shall not apply to:
a. personal data files which are by their nature intended for
personal or domestic use;
b. personal data files which are solely intended for use in
public supply of information by the press, radio or television;
c. books and other written publications and catalogues thereof;
d. personal data files held in an archive within the meaning
of the Archives Act 1962 (Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 313).
2. This Act shall not apply to public registers established
by an Act of Parliament.

3. This Act shall not apply to:
a. personal data files held by or on behalf of the intelligence
and security services to which the Intelligence and Security
Services Act refers;
b. personal data files maintained for the purpose of the
execution of the functions of the police as described in
section 28 of the Police Act (Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees
1957, 244).

Section 3
1. Recommendations for General Administrative Orders under
this Act shall be made by Our Minister. Where an Order also
concerns another of Our Ministers the recommendation shall
be made jointly by Our Minister and that other minister.

2. The Registration Chamber shall be consulted regarding the
draft text of an Order.

PART 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 4
1. A personal data file shall be set up for a specific purpose
which can reasonably be deemed to be relevant to the interests
of the controller.
2. The purpose of a personal data file may not be in conflict
with the law, the maintenance of public order or morality.

Section 5
1. A personal data file shall contain only such personal data
as have been obtained legitimately and are in accordance with
the purpose for which the file has been set up.
2. The controller shall take such steps as are necessary to
ensure the accuracy and completeness of the personal data
included.

Section 6
1. The personal data included in a file shall be used only
for such objectives as are compatible with the purpose of
the file.
2. Within the organization of the controller data from a personal
data file may be issued only to persons entitled to receive
such data in the course of their work.

Section 7
1. Within one year of this section entering into force rules
shall be laid down by General Administrative Order concerning
the inclusion in a personal data file of information on any
individual's religious beliefs or philosophy of life, race,
political persuasion, sexuality or intimate private life and
of personal information of a medical, psychological, criminal
or disciplinary nature.
2. The rules to which subsection 1 above refers may differ
from one type of file to another.

3. Within three years of the General Administrative Order to
which subsection 1 above refers entering into force a Bill
regulating the matter to which that subsection refers shall
be submitted to the States General. The Registration Chamber
shall be consulted regarding the text of that Bill.
4. Before making its recommendations regarding a General Adminis­
trative Order or Bill as mentioned in this section the Registra­
tion Chamber shall give all persons the opportunity of submitting
objections or comments in writing.

Section 8
A controller shall take the necessary technical and organiza­
tional measures to render secure any data file over which he
has control against loss of or interference with the data
contained therein and against unauthorized access to or amend­
ment or issue of such data. This same obligation shall rest
upon a processor in respect of the hardware or that section
thereof which he operates.

Section 9
1. The following subsections shall apply, without prejudice
to other statutory rights, where any person suffers damage
as a result of actions incompatible with the requirements of or
pursuant to this Act for the protection of the interests of data
subjects and prospective data ..subjects .
2. Where the damage suffered does not constitute a material
loss the aggrieved party shall be entitled to fair compensa­
tion.
3. The controller of a personal data file shall be liable for any loss
or damage resulting from failure to comply with the requirements
to which subsection 1 above refers in relation to that file.
The processor shall be liable for any loss or damage resulting
from his actions.

Section 10
1. Where any person suffers or is in danger of suffering damage
through acts of the controller or processor of a personal
data file which are incompatible with the requirements
of or pursuant to this Act the Court may, on application
from such a person, prohibit such acts on the part of the control­
ler or processor and order the controller or processor to repair
the consequences of such acts.
2. An application as mentioned in subsection 1 above may also
be made by a legal person with full legal powers whose purpose
and activity comprise the protection of the interests of persons
who suffer or are in danger of suffering damage through
acts of the controller or processor of a data file.

PART 3. ISSUE OF DATA TO A THIRD PARTY

Section 11
1. Data from a personal data file shall be issued to a third
party only if such issue follows from the purpose of the file, under a statutory requirement or with the consent
of the data subject.

2. Data may be issued to a third party, on request, for research
or statistical purposes or on the grounds of urgent and important
considerations, where this does not have a disproportionate
adverse effect on the privacy of the data subjects.
3. The issue of data under subsections 1 and 2 above shall not
take place where confidentiality is a requirement of office or
profession or is a statutory requirement.
4. Where the data subject is a minor under the age of sixteen or
. has been placed under guardianship, the consent of the data
subject shall be replaced by the consent of his legal representative.

Section 12
1. Where the consent of the data subject or of his legal repre­
sentative is required for the issue of data from a personal
data file such consent may be given only in writing.
2. Such consent may relate only to a single case or to a
limited category of cases and must be precisely defined in
the document in which it is contained.
3. Such consent may be withdrawn in writing at any time.

Section 13
1. This section shall apply to personal data files held wholly
or partly for the purpose of this activity by a natural or
legal person who gathers and issues personal data to third parties, on
a commercial basis, other than with the consent of the data
subjects or, in the cases mentioned in section 11 (4), of their
legal representatives.
2. Personal data files as mentioned in subsection 1 above shall
include only personal data which have been checked and found
to be accurate.
3. Data from a personal data file as mentioned in subsection
I above shall be issued to a third party only at his request.
Such a request shall specify the purpose for which the data
requested are to be used.
4. Such issue shall not take place if:
a. the purpose for which it is requested is in conflict with
the law, the maintenance of public order or morality;
b. the issue of data is not reasonably consonant with that
purpose;
c. it would have a disproportionate adverse effect on the privacy
of the data subject.
5. The controller of a personal data file as mentioned in subsection 1 above shall keep a record of each issue of data to a
third party for at least one year after the issue has taken
place unless he has reasonable grounds for assuming that this
does not serve the interest of the data subject.

Section 14

1. Personal information consisting only of names, addresses,
post codes and other such information needed for communication purposes
may be issued to third parties from personal data files other
than those to which section 13 (1) refers in circumstances
other than those to which section 11 (1,2) refers. Sections
II (3) and 13 (3,4) shall then apply mutatis mutandis.
2. The controller shall refrain from issuing such data at the
request of the data subject or, in the cases mentioned in section
11 (4), of his legal representative.

PART 4. CODES OF CONDUCT AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS

Section 15
1. Any organization or organizations, having adopted a code of
conduct, may apply to the Registration Chamber for a declaration
that in the Chamber's judgement the code concerned conforms with the
provisions of or pursuant to this Act and meets reasonable require­
ments for the protection of the privacy of data subjects.
2. The Chamber shall consider such an application only if in its
judgement the applicant or applicants are representative of
the sector concerned, that sector is precisely defined in the
code and the code has been drawn up with due care and notably in
adequate consultation with organizations of interested parties.
3. Before reaching a decision on an application which it has
seen fit to consider the Chamber shall give all persons the
opportunity of submitting objections or comments in writing.
4. The Chamber shall publish the declaration and the code of
conduct to which it relates in the Netherlands Government Gazette.
5. A declaration as mentioned in subsection 1 above shall remain
in force for the period for which the code of conduct to which
it relates is intended to remain in force, subject to a maximum
of five years after the issue of the declaration.
6. Such a declaration shall not be binding on the Courts.
7. When the Chamber makes known its decision on an application
it shall give its reasons for reaching that decision. There
shall be no procedure under administrative law for appealing
against such a decision.

Section 16
1. Three years after section 15 above has entered into force more
detailed regulations in respect of a particular sector may be made by
General Administrative Order governing the matters regulated by
sections 4 to 6, 8 and 11 to 14.
2. In its annual reports the Registration Chamber shall indicate
to what extent it considers the implementation of subsection 1
above to be desirable.

3. Before making any recommendation regarding the text of a
General Administrative Order as mentioned in subsection 1 above
the Chamber shall give all persons the opportunity of submitting
objections or comments in writing.

PART 5. PERSONAL DATA FILES IN THE AREAS OF GOVERNMENT, EDUCATION,
HEALTH CARE AND THE SOCIAL SERVICES

Section 17
This part shall apply to personal data files held by:
a. central government, provincial and municipal authorities
and other public bodies, including the services, institutions
and enterprises for which they are responsible;
b. institutions, designated by General Administrative Order,
which are charged with the implementation of functions under
public law;
c. institutions and organizations, designated by General Adminis­
trative Order, in the fields of education, health care and social
services.

Section 18
1. A personal data file as mentioned in section 17 above shall
be established only where this is essential for the effective execu­
tion of the functions of the controller.
2. Such personal data files shall contain only such personal data
as are required by the purpose of the file.
3. Data from such files may be issued, on request, to
persons or bodies with a function under public law where such
persons or bodies require that data for the execution
of their function and this does not have a disproportionate
adverse effect on the privacy of the data subjects. Section 11 (3)
shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Section 19
1. Every personal data file as mentioned in section 17 shall
be subject to regulations as defined in section 20.
2. The regulations and any amendment or withdrawal thereof
shall be made public and shall be available for inspection by
any person in accordance with provisions to be laid down by
General Administrative Order.

3. The controller of the personal data file to which the regulations
relate shall inform the Registration Chamber in writing of
the nature of the file and of the fact that the regulations are
available for inspection, giving his name and address.
4. The controller shall inform the Registration Chamber within
four weeks of any change in his name or address.

Section 20
1. The regulations to which each personal data file as mentioned
in section 17 is subject shall include a description of
the way in which the data file operates.
2. The document shall in any event clearly indicate:
a. the purpose of the data file;
b. the categories of persons concerning whom information is included
in the data file;
c. the types of information which are included in the data file
and the way in which they are obtained;
d. the circumstances in which personal data are removed from
the data file;
e. the categories of persons or bodies to whom or to which data
from the data file may be issued;
f. the types of data which may be issued to the persons or bodies
mentioned under e. above;
g. the methods of direct access to the data file;
h. any associations between the data file and any other collection
of data;
i. the manner in which data subjects of their legal representatives
may obtain information on and, where appropriate, secure the correction
of data concerning them;
j. the manner in which data subjects or their legal representatives
may obtain notification of the issue of data concerning them;
k. the principal features of the management of the file.

Section 21
The controller, the processor and all others involved in the
operation of a personal data file shall comply with the provisions
of the regulations made public in accordance with section 19 (2).

Section 22
1. A General Administrative Order may be made containing provisions
to the effect that section 19 shall not apply to personal files speci­
fied therein which meet requirements laid down therein.
2. Provisions as mentioned in subsection 1 above shall in any
event be made in respect of:
a. accounting and financial management systems;
b. staffing and payroll systems;
c. other records systems than those mentioned under a. and b.
above which form part of the internal management of organizations;
d. subscription records;
e. records of members and supporters;
f. other personal data files containing no information other
than names, addresses, post codes and other such information
needed for communication purposes.

PART 6. PERSONAL DATA FILES IN THE AREA OF INDUSTRY AND THE
PROFESSIONS AND IN OTHER AREAS

Section 23
This Part shall apply to personal data files not covered by
section 17.

Section 24
1. Every personal data file to which this Part applies shall
be registered with the Registration Chamber.
2. Such registration shall take place through the submission
of the relevant form, the requirements for which shall be laid
down by Our Minister.
3. The information to be supplied on the form shall be determined
by General Administrative Order and may relate only to such matters
as are mentioned in section 20 (2). The name and address of
the controller of the file shall also be given on the form.
4.

Notice of the registration shall be made public and a copy

of the form shall be available for inspection by any person
in accordance with regulations to be laid down by General Adminis. trative Order.

Section 25
1. The controller of a registered personal data file shall
inform the Registration Chamber in writing and within four
weeks of any change in his name or address.
2. Section 24 shall apply mutatis mutandis where the other
information supplied is amended or supplemented or the data
file is terminated, except that only the change or supplementa­
tion or termination need be notified.

Section 26

The controller, the processor and all others involved in the
operation of a personal data file shall act in relation to
that file in accordance with the information supplied at the
time of registration.

Section 27
A General Administrative Order may be made containing provisions
to the effect that sections 24 and 25 shall not apply to
personal data files specified therein which meet requirements laid
down therein. Section 22 (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis.

PART 7. RIGHTS OF INFORMATION AND CORRECTION

Section 28
1. The controller of a personal data file shall notify every
person on whom personal data have been recorded in that file
for the first time, within one month, that this has been done. Such
notification shall be given in writing and shall include the purpose of
the file and the name and address of the controller.
2. The requirement to which subsection 1 above refers shall not apply:
a. if the data subject concerned is aware or can reasonably
be expected to be aware that such recording has taken place;
b. if it is clearly in the interests of the data subject that
no such written notification be given;
c. where this is necessitated in the interests as mentioned
in section 30,

Section 29
1. The controller of a personal data file shall, on request from any
person and within one month of receiving the request, inform that
person in writing whether personal data concerning him are
contained in the file.
2. Where such data are contained in the file the controller
shall, within one month of receiving the request, supply the
data subject with a full statement thereof, with information
on their source, should the data subject request this.
3. Where this is clearly in the interests of the person concerned
the controller shall comply with a request as mentioned in this
section not in writing but in another manner appropriate to
those interests.
4. The controller shall take adequate steps to verify the identity
of any person making a request as mentioned in this section.
5. Where the person concerned is a minor under the age of sixteen
or has been placed under guardianship, the requests as mentioned in
subsections 1 and 2 above shall be made by his legal representative.
The information to which these subsections refer shall likewise by
given to the legal representative.

Section 30
The controller of a personal data file may refuse to comply with
a request as mentioned in section 29 where this is necessitated in
the interests of:
a. the security of the state;
b. the investigation of criminal offences and the prosecution
of offenders;
c. the economic and financial interests of the state and other
public bodies;
d. inspection, monitoring, or supervision by or on behalf of
government bodies or other bodies with functions under public law;
e. vital interests of persons other than the applicant, including
the controller.

Section 31
1. Any person receiving information under section 29 on personal
data held concerning him may apply in writing to the controller
of the data file requesting their correction, supplementation
or removal where such data are factually incorrect, are incomplete
or irrelevant in terms of the purpose of the file or are held
in contravention of a statutory provision. Such a request shall
specify the changes to be made.
2. Within two months of receiving such a request the controller
shall notify the applicant in writing whether or in what respects
he has complied or will comply with it. Section 29 (3, 4 and 5)
shall apply mutatis mutandis. Where the controller refuses to
comply

he shall give the reasons for his refusal.

3. The controller shall ensure that a decision to correct, supple­
ment or remove data is implemented without delay.

Section 32
1. The controller of a personal data file shall, on request from any
data subject and within one month of receiving the request,
inform that person in writing whether data concerning him have
been issued to any third party in the year preceding the request.
2. Where data have been issued the controller shall inform the data
subject accordingly, in writing, within one month of receiving the
request. The controller may supply a notification couched in general
terms concerning the nature of the data issued and the person or
persons to whom they were issued, where no detailed record has been
made and he could reasonably assume that the interests of the data
subject would not thereby suffer a disproportionate adverse effect.
3. Sections 29 (3, 4 and 5) and 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Section 33
In the case of personal data files maintained solely for research
or statistical purposes:

a. sections 28 to 31 shall not apply where the results
obtained through the use of the data cannot be related to individual
natural persons;
b. section 32 shall not apply to. the issue of data to a third
party collecting them solely for research or statistical purposes,
providing the results obtained through their use cannot be related
to individual natural persons.

Section 34
1. Where the controller of a personal data file fails to comply, or
does not comply in writing, with a request as mentioned in section
29, 31 or 32, the data subject concerned shall have the right to
apply to the district court, in writing, for an order requiring
the controller to comply, or to comply in writing, with that
request. A data subject considering that his interests have been
adversely affected by a notification as mentioned in the second
sentence of section 32 (2) shall have the same right.
2. An application as mentioned in subsection 1 above must be
made within two months of receipt of the reply of the controller.
Where the controller fails to reply within the set period, the
application must be submitted within two months of the end of
that period.
3. The data subject may also, within the period specified in
subsection 2 above, apply to the Registration Chamber requesting
its mediation or advice in his dispute with the controller.
In such a case an application as mentioned in subsection 1 above
may be made up to two months after the data subject has been
informed by the Registration Chamber that it does not intend
taking further action on the matter.
4. The court may obtain the advice of the Registration Chamber
concerning any application made to it under subsection 1 above.
5. The court shall grant the application if it finds it well
grounded.
6. Title 12 of the First Book of the Code of Civil Procedure,
with the exception of article 429d, paragraph 3, shall come
into effect as regards such proceedings as are mentioned in
subsections 1 to 5 above simultaneously with this section.

Article 345 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall not apply.
7. Parc 3 of Title 5 of the Second Book of the Code of Civil
Procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis.
8. The registrar shall forward a copy of the court's
judgement to the Registration Chamber.

Section 35
1. Any controller complying with a request under section 31
or who is ordered by the court under section 34 (5) to comply
with such a request shall notify any person to whom he has,
to his knowledge, issued the data in question during the year
preceding the request or since the request was made of the
correction, supplementation or removal of that data.
2. The controller shall inform the data subject concerned of
the persons whom he has notified in this way.
3. This section shall not apply if the data subject has indicated
that he does not require such notification to be made.

Section 36
The controller of a personal data file may require reimbursement
of costs incurred in supplying information as mentioned in sections
29 and 31, the fee not exceeding an amount to be determined
by or in pursuance of General Administrative Order. Such reimburse­
ment shall be returned in the case of the refusal of a request
as mentioned in those sections or where, at the request of the
data subject or having been ordered to do so by the court, the
controller undertakes the correction, supplementation or removal
of data.

PART 8. THE REGISTRATION CHAMBER

Section 37
1. There shall be established a Registration Chamber.
2. The Chamber shall exercise supervision of the operation of
personal data files in accordance with this Act and provisions
made in pursuance thereof and for the purpose of the protection
of privacy in general.

3. The Chamber shall advise Our Minister and, in appropriate
cases, Our Minister and Our other ministers also concerned, jointly,
both on request and on its own initiative, regarding the implemen­
tation of this Act and other associated subjects.
4. The Chamber shall fulfil such other functions as may be entrusted
to it by law.
5. The Chamber shall each year submit to Our Minister a public
report on its work and findings.

Section 38
1. The Chamber shall have a chairman, two other members and
a number, to be determined by Royal Decree on the recommendation
of Our Minister, of substitute members and special members.
2. The chairman shall be appointed by Royal Decree, on the recom­
mendation of Our Minister, for a period of six years; his appoint­
ment may be renewed. The remaining members and the substitute
and special members shall be appointed by Royal Decree, on the
recommendation of Our Minister, for periods of four-years; their
appointment may be renewed only once.
3. In the appointment of the special members every effort shall
be made to ensure that the various sectors of society are repre­
sented.

Section 39
1. The appointment of members, substitute members and special
members shall be terminated by Royal Decree, on the recommendation
of Our Minister, as of the first day of the month following that
in which they reach the age of sixty-five.
2. Section 11 (with the exception of the provisions in d, 3°),
sections 12 to 13, section 13a (with the exception of subsection
5), sections 13b, 14a, 14b, 14c, 14d (1,2) and 14e of the Judiciary
(Organization) Act (Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 1972,
463) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
3. When section 14d (2) of the Judiciary (Organization) Act
is applied the Supreme Court shall give the chairman of the
Chamber the opportunity of furnishing information, orally or
in writing, concerning a complaint brought before it and to
make known his views on the matter.

Section 40
1. The chairman shall receive a salary, the other members payment
for the work they carry out and the substitute and special
members an attendence allowance, in accordance with regulations
to be laid down by General Administrative Order. Section 3 (2)
shall not apply in this connection.
2. They shall also receive reimbursement of travelling and subsis­
tence expenses in accordance with the regulations applying to
civil servants classed in the highest category for this purpose.
3. The chairman may not without the consent of Our Minister
perform any other duties for which remuneration is paid.

Section 41
The Chamber shall be serviced by a secretariat. The appointment,
suspension and dismissal of the staff of the secretariat shall
be the responsibility of Our Minister, on the recommendation
of the chairman.

Section 42
1. The chairman shall direct the work of the Chamber and of
its secretariat.
2. A first and a second deputy chairman shall be appointed from
among the members of the Chamber by Royal Decree on the recommenda­
tion of Our Minister.

Section 43

1. The Chamber shall have a Central Division comprising the
chairman and the two other members. Each member may be replaced
by a substitute member.
2. The Central Division may establish multi-member and single
member divisions for the performance of duties defined by the
Central Division.
3. A multi-member division shall have a member or substitute
member of the Chamber as its chairman and two special members of the
Chamber as its members. A single member division shall consist of one
member or substitute member of the Chamber.
4. The Central Division shall appoint the members of the other
divisions. It may appoint another member or substitute member
of the Chamber to replace a member or substitute member of the
Chamber in a division and another special member to replace
a special member in a division.

Section 44
The Central Division shall be responsible for the advisory reports
to which section 37 (3) refers and for the annual report. It
shall also deal with any matters which it has not assigned
to other divisions.

Section 45
1. The Chamber shall be furnished at its request with data from
any personal data file.
2. The controller of a personal data file and any persons involved
in the operation of a personal data file shall, when required
to do so, furnish the Chamber, the officers of the secretariat
and any other persons designated for this purpose by the Chamber
with all the information and shall give them all the assistance
which they require for the execution of their duties.
3. The members, substitute members and special members of the
Chamber, the officers of the secretariat and any other persons
designated for this purpose by the Chamber shall have access
for the execution of their duties to any location where a personal
data file or section thereof is situated or from which the file
is accessible. They may also examine hardware, software, books
and records and have hardware and software demonstrated to them
where this may reasonably be required for the execution of their
duties.
4. The officers of the secretariat and the other persons to
whom subsection 3 above refers may exercise the powers defined
in that subsection only with the express and specific authority
of the Chamber.
5. If in the reasonable judgement of the Chamber the assistance
to which this section refers is not given to an adequate extent
such measures as may be necessary may be taken at the expense
of the defaulting party.

6. No appeal may be made Co a requirement of
confidentiality
where information or assistance is required in connection with
the involvement of the individual concerned in the operation
of a personal data file.

Section 46
1. The Chamber may, on its own behalf or at the request of an
interested party, which may be a legal person as mentioned in
section 10 (2), institute an investigation into the manner in
which effect is given to this Act and provisions made in pursuance
thereof in respect of a personal data file.
2. Where an investigation is instituted at the request of an
interested party the Chamber shall notify that party of its
findings, except where to do so would be incompatible with the
purpose of the file or the nature of the personal data or would
have a disproportionate adverse effect on the vital interests
of persons other than the person making the request, including
the controller. Where the Chamber does not notify the interested
party of its findings it shall send the interested party such
notification as it considers advisable.
3. The Chamber may, where its findings give grounds for doing
so, make a recommendation to the controller of a personal data
file. It shall first give the controller the opportunity of
making his views known.
4. There shall be no procedure under administrative law for
appealing against a refusal of a request as mentioned in subsection
above, a notification as mentioned in subsection 2 above or
a recommendation as mentioned in subsection 3 above.

PART 9. INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS

Section 47
1. This Act shall also apply to any personal data file not located
in the Netherlands of a controller established in the Netherlands
where such a file contains data on persons resident in the Nether­
lands .
2. Our Minister may, having consulted the Registration Chamber,
exempt a personal data file as mentioned in subsection 1 above
from requirements of or pursuant to this Act providing the legis­
lation applying to that file in the country where it is situated
provides equivalent protection for the privacy of the data subjects.

Section 48
Our Minister may, having consulted the Registration Chamber,
exempt personal data files whose controller is not established
in the Netherlands from requirements of or pursuant to this
Act providing there are adequate safeguards for the protection
of the privacy of the data subjects in relation to that file.

Section 49
1. Any person having access from the Netherlands to a personal
data file located outside the Netherlands and to which this
Act does not apply shall ensure the security of that access
and of the personal data obtained by that means.
2. Data shall not be supplied from the Netherlands to, or obtained
in the Netherlands from, any data file in another country to
which this Act does not apply where it has been declared by
General Administrative Order that such a transfer of data would
have a serious adverse effect on the privacy of the persons
concerned.

PART 10. PENAL PROVISIONS

Section 50
1. Any person
a. having a personal data file in operation in respect of which the
provisions of or pursuant to section 19, section 24 or section 25
are not met,
b. acting as the processor of a personal data file as mentioned
under a. above,
c. failing to comply with the provisions of or pursuant to section
49 (2)shall be liable to a category two fine.
2. Any person deliberately committing an act as mentioned in
subsection 1 above shall be liable to a term of imprisonment not
exceeding six months or a category three fine.
3. The offences to which subsection 1 above refers shall be summary
offences; those to which subsection 2 above refers shall be indictable
offences.
4. The investigation of the offences described in this section
shall be the responsibility of officers designated under or
in pursuance of Article 141 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
and of officers of the secretariat of the Registration Chamber
designated by Our Minister for this purpose.

PART 11. TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 51
Any person concerned with the implementation of this Act
who thereby obtains access to information he knows or can reaso­
nably assume to be confidential and who is not anyway bound
by an official, professional or statutory requirement of confi­
dentiality in respect of such information shall maintain
confidentiality in respect of that information except where
disclosure is required by a statutory obligation or in the execution of his duties'in the implementation of this Act.

Section 52
The Central Government Personnel Act 1929 (Bulletin of Acts,
Orders and Decrees 530) shall be amended as follows:
In section 2 (2) the final full stop shall be replaced by a
semi-colon and the following added:
i. the chairman, members, substitute members and special-members
of the Registration Chamber to which the Data Protection Act
refers.

Section 53
The National Ombudsman Act (Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees
1981, 35) shall be amended as follows:
A. in section 1 (3) the final full stop shall be replaced by
a semi-colon and the following added:
h. the Registration Chamber to which the Data Protection Act
refers.
B. in section 1 (4) the words "subsection 3, under b-g" shall be
replaced by the words "subsection 3, under b-h".

Section 54
1. This Act, with the exception of Parts 5, 6 and 10, shall enter
into force at a date to be determined by Royal Decree, but not
later than six months after the promulgation of this Act.
2. Parts 5, 6 and 10 shall enter into force at a date to be
determined by Royal Decree, but not later than one year after
the promulgation of this Act.
3. Parts 5, 6 and 10 shall not apply to personal data files
already in existence at the date mentioned in subsection 2 above
for a period of six months after that date.
4. It may be determined by General Administrative Order that
this Act does not apply to personal data files designated in
the Order which are established by or pursuant to an Act of Parliament
and are in existence at the date mentioned in subsection 1 above.
Such an Order shall be made only if in Our view a further statu­
tory provision is required, in connection with the introduction
of this Act, in respect of those personal data files. Unless
withdrawn earlier, such an Order shall lapse three years after
entering into force, except where a Bill proposing a statutory
provision as mentioned in the preceding sentence has been submitted
to the States General before then.
5. Section 3 (2) shall not apply to a General Administrative
Order as mentioned in subsection 4 above and in section 36, the latter
only when the order is made before the date mentioned in subsection 1
above.
6. Section 28 shall apply mutatis mutandis to personal data which
are contained in a personal data file at the date mentioned in sub­
section 1 above, except that the notification with regard to these
data shall be given within six months after that date.

Section 55
This Act may be cited as: The Data Protection Act.
We order and command that this Act shall be published in the Bulletin
of Acts, Orders and Decrees and that all ministerial departments,
authorities, bodies and officials whom it may concern shall diligently
implement it.
