Data Protection

[No. 3 of 2021 87

THE DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2021
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
Section
1. Short title and commencement
2. Interpretation
3. Application
PART II
OFFICE OF THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSIONER
4. Establishment of Office of Data Protection Commissioner
5. Data protection Commissioner
6. Appointment of Deputy Data Protection Commissioners and other staff
PART III
INSPECTORATE
7. Inspector
8. Power of inspectors
9. Arrest without warrant
10. Seizure of property
11.

Restoration of property
PART IV
PRINCIPLES AND RULES RELATING TO PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

12. Principles relating to processing of personal data
13. Processing of personal data
14.

Processing of sensitive personal data

15. Consent, justification and objection
16. Collection of personal data
17. Processing of child and vulnerable person’s personal data
18. Offence and penalty for contravention of personal data obligation
Single copies of this Act may be obtained from the Government Printer,
P.O. Box 30136, 10101 Lusaka, Price K80.00 each.


PART V
REGULATION OF DATA CONTROLLERS, DATA PROCESSORS
AND DATA AUDITORS
19. Prohibition from controlling or processing personal data without
registration
20. Application for registration as data processor or data controller
21. Registration of data controller and data processor
22. Renewal of certificate of registration
23. Change in details of data controller or data processor
24. Suspension and cancellation of registration
25. Re-registration
26. Surrender of certificate of registration
27. Exemption from registration
28. Power to forbear
PART VI
DATA AUDITORS
29. Data auditors
30. Application for licence
31. Issue of licences
32. Conditions of licence
33. Variation of licence
34. Surrender of licence
35. Transfer of licence
36. Suspension and cancellation
37. Renewal of licence
38. Functions of a data auditor
PART VII
EXEMPTION FROM PRINCIPLES AND RULES OF PROCESSING OF DATA
39. National security, defence and public order
40. Prevention, detection investigation and prosecution of contraventions of
law
41. Processing for purpose of legal proceedings

42. Research, archiving or statistical purpose
43. Journalistic purpose
44. Processing to be lawful and legitimate
PART VIII
DUTIES OF DATA CONTROLLER AND DATA PROCESSOR
45. Record of processing activities
46. Data protection impact assessment
47. Security of processing
48. Appointment of data protection officer
49. Notification of security breach
50. Accountability
51. Data retention
52. Duties of data processor
53. Non-disclosure of personal data
54. Joint controllers
55. Offence by data controller
56. Personal data in legal proceedings
57. Notification
PART IX
RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT
58. Right of access and notification
59. Right to rectification
60. Right to erasure
61. Right of objection
62. Decision taken on basis of automatic data processing
63. Right to restriction of processing
64. Information when personal data collected directly from data subject
65. Right to data portability
66. Notification obligation
67. Derogation from rights
68. Complaints
69. Appeals

PART X
TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA OUTSIDE THE REPUBLIC
70. Crossborder transfer of personal data
71. Conditions for crossborder transfer of personal data
PART XI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
72. Right to compensation
73. Offences
74. Power of Data Protection Commissioner to compound certain
offences
75. Forfeiture
76. Offence by principal officer, shareholder or partner of body corporate
or unincorporate body
77. General penalty
78. Code of conduct
79. Guidelines
80. Register
81. Auditing of data controller
82.

Regulations

GOVERNMENT OF ZAMBIA

ACT
No. 3 of 2021
Date of Assent: 23rd March, 2021
An Act to provide an effective system for the use and
protection of personal data; regulate the collection, use,
transmission, storage and otherwise processing of
personal data; establish the Office of the Data Protection
Commissioner and provide for its functions; the
registration of data controllers and licencing of data
auditors; provide for the duties of data controllers and
data processors; provide for the rights of data subjects;
and provide for matters connected with, or incidental to,
the foregoing.
[24th March, 2021
ENACTED by the Parliament of Zambia.

Enactment

PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be cited as the Data Protection Act, 2021,
and shall come into operation on the date appointed by the Minister
by statutory instrument.
2.

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“anonymisation” means the process of removing direct and
indirect personal identifiers that may lead to an individual
being identified;

Short title
and
commencement
Interpretation

“Authority” means the Zambia Information Communications
and Technology Authority established by the Information
Communications and Technologies Act, 2009;
“automated” in relation to data, means electronically
transmitted in whole or in part, by means of a data message
in which the conduct of a data message of one or more
parties are not reviewed by a natural person in the
operation of the electronic system, in the ordinary course
of that natural person’s business or employment;
“biometric data” means Personal data resulting from scientific
analysis relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural
characteristics of a natural person, which confirm the unique
identification of that natural person;

Cap. 1

“child” has the meaning assigned to the word in the
Constitution;
“child abuse” includes physical and emotional neglect, physical
injury, other than accidental injury, ill treatment and sexual
abuse of a child;
“child abuse data” means personal data consisting of
information as to whether the child data subject is or has
been thesubject of, or may be at risk of, child abuse;
“code of conduct” means a data protection charter approved
by the Authority which regulates the conduct of a data
controller or data processor, in order to ensure that the
data controller or data processor of personal data complies
with this Act and any other applicable written law;

“Commission” means the Competition and Consumer
Protection Commission established by the Competition
and Consumer Protection Act, 2010;
“consent” means any written, freely given, specific, informed
and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wishes
by which such data subject, by a statement or by a clear
affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing
of personal data relating to that data subject;



“consumer” has the meaning assigned to the word in the
Competition and Consumer Protection Act, 2010;
“data” means numbers, letters, alphabetic or numeric strings,
symbols or codes in any form;

“data auditor” means a person licensed as a data auditor under
section 29;
“data controller” means a person who, either alone or jointly
with other persons,controls and is responsible for keeping
and using personal data on a computer, or in structured
manual files, and requests, collects, collates, processes or
stores personal data from or in respect of a data subject;
“data processor” means a person, or a private or public body
that processes personal data for and on behalf of and under
the instruction of a data controller;
“Data Protection Commissioner” means a person appointed
as Data Protection Commissioner under section 5;
“data retention” means a process of retention of personal
data for a specified purpose for a defined period;
“data subject” means an individual from, or in respect of whom,
personal information is processed;
“genetic data” means any personal information relating to
the inherited or acquired genetic characteristics of an
individual which result from the analysis of a biological
sample from the individual in question, in particular
chromosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or ribonucleic
acid (RNA) analysis, or from the analysis of another
element enabling equivalent information to be obtained;
“health practitioner” has the meaning assigned to the word
under the Health Professions Act, 2009;
“Independent BroadcastingAuthority” means the Independent
Broadcasting Authority established by the Independent
Broadcasting Authority Act, 2002;
“information system” means a system for the generation,
sending, reception, storage, display or other processing of
data messages, and includes the internet;
“joint controllers” means two or more data controllers who
jointly determine the purposes for which and the means by
which personal data is processed;

“law enforcement officer” means—
(a) a police officer above the rank of sub-inspector;
(b) an officer of the Anti-Corruption Commission;
(c) an officer of the Drug Enforcement Commission;
(d) an officer of the Zambia Security Intelligence Service;
and
(e) any other person appointed by the Minister for
purposes of this Act;

Cap. 30

“legally disqualified” has the meaning assigned to the words
in the Mental Health Act, 2019;
“legal practitioner” has the meaning assigned to the words in
the Legal Practitioners Act;
“meta data” means data that describes other data;
“personal data” means data which relates to an individual
who can be directly or indirectly identified from that data
which includes a name, an identification number, location
data, an online identifier, or one or more factors specific to
the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic,
cultural or social identity of that natural person;
“processing” means an operation or a set of operations which
is or are performed on personal data, whether or not by
automatic means, including the collection, recording or
holding of the data or the carrying out of any operation or
set of operations on data, including—
(a) organisation, adaptation or alteration of the data;
(b) retrieval, consultation or use of the data;
(c)

alignment, combination, blocking, erasure or
destruction of the data; or

(d) disclosure of the information or data by
transmission, dissemination or otherwise making
available;
“profiling” means any form of automated processing of
personal data consisting of the use of personal data to
evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural
person, including analysis or prediction of the data subject’s
aspects concerning that natural person’s performance at
work, economic situation, health, personal preferences,
interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements;



“pseudonymisation” means the processing of personal data
in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be
attributed to a specific data subject without the use of
additional information, where that additional information is
kept separately and is subject to technical and organisational
measures to ensure that the personal data is not attributed
to an identified or identifiable natural person;
“public body” has the meaning assigned to the words in the
Public Finance Management Act, 2018;
“recipient” means a person to whom data is disclosed,
including an employee or agent of a data controller, a data
processor or an employee or agent of a data processor in
the course of processing the data for the data controller,
but does not include a person to whom disclosure is or
may be made as a result of, or with a view to, a particular
inquiry by or on behalf of that person made in the exercise
of any power conferred by law;
“Register” means the Register kept and maintained under
section 80;
“sensitive personal data” means personal data which by its
nature may be used to suppress the data subject’s
fundamental rights and freedoms and includes
(a) the race, marital status, ethnic origin or sex of a
data subject;
(b) genetic data and biometric data;
(c)

child abuse data;

(d) a data subject’s political opinions;
(e)

a data subject’s religious beliefs or other beliefs of
a similar nature;

(f)

whether a data subject is a member of a trade
union; or

(g) a data subject’s physical or mental health, or
physical or mental condition;
“third party” means a person other than—
(a) a data subject;
(b) a data controller, or
(c) a data processor or other person authorised to
process data on behalf of data controller or data
processor.

“vulnerable person” means a person aged 18 or above and
whose ability to make informed decisions about their
rights and well being is temporally or permanently
impaired through physical or medically certified hindrance
or impairment; and
Application

3. (1) This Act applies to the processing of personal data
performed wholly or partly by automated means and to any
processing otherwise than by electronic means.
(2) This Act does not apply to the processing of personal
data by an individual for personal use.
PART II
OFFICE OF THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSIONER

Establishment
of Office of
Data Protection
Commissioner

4. (1) There is established in the Ministry responsible for
communications the Office of the Data Protection Commissioner
which is responsible for the regulation of data protection and
privacy in the Republic.
(2) The functions of the Office of the Data Protection
Commissioner are to—
(a) register controllers and data processors;
(b) licence data auditors;
(c) disseminate information and promotion of the
participation of stakeholders in the process of data
protection in the Republic;
(d) advise Government on matters relating to data
protection;
(e) keep and maintain a register of data controllers, data
processors and data auditors;
(f)represent Government internationally on matters relating
to data protection;
(g) conduct research and development relating to data
protection;
(h) ensure proper and effective coordination and
collaboration with similar regional and international
authorities;

(i) receive and investigate complaints under this Act; and
(j)vary conditions and terms of a licence issued under this
Act.
5. (1) The President, through the Civil Service Commission,
shall appoint a Data Protection Commissioner who shall be a public
officer with the following skills, qualifications and expertise:

Data
Protection
Commissioner

(a) minimum university degree level in information
communication technologies;
(b) data protection rules and operations;
( c) data protection laws; and
(d) at least four years at senior management level in a
related field.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner is responsible for the
day to day administration of the Office of the Data Protection
Commission.
6. (1) The Civil Service Commission shall, on the
recommendation of the Office of the Data Protection Commissioner,
appoint as public officers two Deputy Data Protection
Commissioners and other staff as may be necessary for the
performance of the functions of the Office of the Data Protection
Commission.

Appointment
of Deputy
Data
Protection
Commissioners
and other
staff

(2) The two Deputy Data Protection Commissioners are
responsible for the formulation of policies and planning and for
data processing system.
PART III
INSPECTORATE
7. (1) The Civil Service Commission may appoint a suitably
qualified person to be an inspector for the purposes of ensuring
compliance with this Act.

Inspector

(2) The Civil Service Commission shall issue an inspector with
an identification card and a certificate of appointment in the
prescribed form which are prima facie evidence of the inspector’s
appointment.
8. (1) An inspector may, for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this Act, at any reasonable time and with a warrant—
(a) enter and inspect the business premises of a data controller
or data processor;

Power of
inspectors

(b) inspect equipment and supplies in or about the licensed
premises;
(c) have access to and inspect, examine and audit documents,
books and records of the data controller or data
processor;
(d) remove a document, book, record or other document which
an inspector believes may afford evidence of offence
under this Act;
(e) require from a data controller or data processor an
explanation of any record or entry in the document, book,
record or other document;
(f)make copies of or extracts from, a document, book, record
or other document relating to the licensed activity on
any premises that has a bearing on an investigation; and
(g) remove from the premises any equipment, commodity or
product used in contravention of this Act.
(2) An inspector may perform an inspection for the purposes
of ensuring a data controller’s or data processor’s compliance with
this Act.
(3) A data controller or data processor shall afford an inspector
access to any record or document for purposes of an inspection
and produce to the inspector, a record or document that the inspector
may require.
(4) An inspector shall exercise the power under subsection
(1)(a) in relation to a dwelling house or any land or building occupied
as a private dwelling, during the day with a warrant.
(5) An inspector who removes an article, document, record,
book or any other thing from any premises under subsection (1),
shall—
(a) issue a receipt for the article, document, record, book or
any other thing to the owner or person in control of the
premises; and
(b) return the article, thing, record, book or any other document
as soon as practicable after achieving the purpose for
which it was removed.

9. (1) An inspector may arrest a person, without a warrant,
where the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that the
person—

Arrest
without
warrant

(a) has committed an offence under this Act;
(b) is about to commit an offence under this Act and there is
no other way to prevent the commission of the offence;
or
(c) is willfully obstructing an inspector in the execution of the
inspector’s duties.
(2) An inspector who makes an arrest under subsection (1)
shall, without delay, have the person arrested brought to a police
station.
10. A law enforcement officer may seize and detain property
which the inspector has reason to believe was used to commit an
offence under this Act until an order of the court is made regarding
the disposal thereof.
11. (1) A law enforcement officer shall, where a person from
whom an article or other property has been seized under section 10
is found not guilty or the proceedings against that person are
withdrawn —
(a) without delay, restore the article or property to that person;
or
(b) where the enforcement officer is satisfied that the person
cannot be found or is unwilling to receive back the article
or property, apply to the court for an order of forfeiture
of the article or property.
(2) The court shall make an order of forfeiture under subsection
(1) if —
(a) the law enforcement officer has given notice, by publication
in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in the Republic, to the effect that the article
or property which has been seized under this Act shall
vest in the State if it is not claimed within three months
from the date of publication of the notice; and
(b) three months after the giving of the notice under paragraph
(a),the article or property remains unclaimed.
(3) Where a claim is made, in writing, by a person that is lawfully
entitled to the article or property seized under this Act, the law
enforcement officer may order the release of the article or property
to the claimant if satisfied that there is no dispute concerning the
ownership of the article or property and that it is not liable to
forfeiture.


PART IV
PRINCIPLES AND RULES RELATING TO PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
Principles
relating to
processing of
personal data

12. (1) A data controller or data processor shall ensure that
personal data is—
(a) processed lawfully, fairly and transparently;
(b) collected for explicit, specified and legitimate purposes
and not further processed in a manner incompatible
with those purposes;
(c) adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in
relation to the purposes for which it is processed;
(d) accurate and where necessary, kept up to date, with every
reasonable step taken to ensure that any inaccurate
personal data is erased or rectified without delay;
(e) stored in a form which permits identification of data
subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes
for which the personal data is processed;
(f) processed in accordance with the rights of a data subject;
and
(g) processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security
of the personal data, including protection against
unauthorised or unlawful processing and against any
loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical
or organisational measures.
(2) For the purposes of subsection 1(b), processing of personal
data for purposes of archiving in the public interest, scientific or
historical research purposes or statistical purposes shall not be
considered to be incompatible with the initial purpose.

Processing of
personal data

13. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a data controller
may process personal data where—
(a) the data subject has given consent to the processing of
that data subject’s personal data;
(b) the processing is necessary—
(i) for the performance of a contract to which the
data subject is party or in order to take steps at
the request of the data subject prior to entering
into a contract;
(ii) for compliance with a legal obligation to which
the data controller is subject;

(iii) in order to protect the vital interests of the data
subject or of another natural person;
(iv) for the performance of a task carried out in the
public interest or in the exercise of official
authority vested in the data controller;
(v) for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued
by the data controller or by a third party, except
where such interests are overridden by the
interest or fundamental rights and freedoms of
the data subject which require protection of
personal data, in particular where the data
subject is a child; or
(c) the processing relates to personal data which is manifestly
made public by the data subject.
14. (1) A person shall not process sensitive personal data,
unless—

Processing of
sensitive
personal data

(a) processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise
or defence of a legal claim or whenever a court is
exercising a judicial function;
(b) processing is necessary for the purposes of preventive or
occupational medicine, for the assessment of the
working capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis,
the provision of health or social care or treatment or the
management of health or social care systems and
services ;or
(c) processing is necessary for reasons of public interest.
(2) Personal data under subsection (1)(b) may be processed
when the data is processed by or under the responsibility of a
professional, subject to secrecy and other obligations imposed by
any law or professional bodies regulating them.
(3) Personal data referred to under subsection (1) (c) shall be
processed only where adequate measures to safeguard the rights
and freedoms of the data subject have been put in place.
15. (1) A data controller shall not process personal data unless
the data subject consents to the processing.
(2) A data subject may consent to the processing of that data
subject’s personal data in writing.

Consent,
justification
and objection

(3) Prior to giving consent, the data subject shall be informed of
the data subject’s right to withdraw the consent.
(4) A data controller shall, where processing is based on consent,
demonstrate that the data subject has consented to the processing.
(5) Where a data subject consents in the form of a written
declaration which also concerns other matters, the request for
consent shall be presented in a manner which is clearly
distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible and easily
accessible form, using clear and plain language.
(6) A data subject shall have the right to withdraw consent at
any time.
(7) The withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness
of processing based on consent under subsection (5) before its
withdrawal and all personal data collected following withdrawal of
the consent shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be destroyed
immediately.
(8) A data subject may object, at any time, to the processing
of that data subject’s personal data.
(9) Where a data subject has objected to the processing of
that data subject’s personal data, the data controller or data
processor shall no longer process that personal data.
Collection of
personal data

16. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a data controller shall collect
personal data directly from a data subject.
(2) A data controller may collect personal data from a source
other than the data subject if—
(a) the data is contained in or derived from a public record or
has intentionally been made public by the data subject;
(b) the data subject has consented to the collection of data
from another source;
(c) collection of data from another source would not prejudice
the interest of the data subject;
(d) collection of data from another source is necessary—
(i) to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law
and order by any public body, including the
prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution
and punishment of an offence;

(ii) to comply with an obligation imposed by law; or
(iii) for the conduct of proceedings in any court or
tribunal that have commenced or are reasonably
contemplated; or
(iv) for the purposes of national security;
(e) collection from the data subject would prejudice a lawful
purpose of the collection;
(f) compliance is not reasonably practicable in the
circumstances of the particular case; or
(g) it is—
(i) necessary for the provision of an emergency
medical service to the data subject;
(ii) required for the establishment of the identity of
the data subject and the collection is authorised
by a law written for that purpose;
(iii) necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to national
security, defence or public order; or
(iv) necessary to prevent, investigate or prosecute a
cognisable offence.
17. (1) Where a data subject is a child or a vulnerable person,
that data subject’s right may be exercised by that data subject’s
parents, legal guardian or a person exercising parental responsibility
as the case may be.

Processing of
child and
vulnerable
person’s
personal data

(2) A data controller shall not process a child’s or vulnerable
person’s personal data unless consent is given by the child’s or
vulnerable person’s parent, legal guardian or a person exercising
parental responsibility.
(3) A data controller shall, where the personal data of a child or
a vulnerable person is involved, make every reasonable effort to
verify that consent has been given or authorised, taking into account
available technology.
(4) A data controller shall incorporate appropriate mechanisms
for age verification and parental consent in the processing of personal
data of a child.
18. (1) A body corporate that contravenes the provisions of
this Part commits an offence and is liable on conviction to—
(a) a fine not exceeding one hundred million penalty units; or
(b) two percent of annual turnover of the preceding financial
year, whichever is higher.

Offence and
penalty for
contravention
of personal
data
obligation

(2) Where the offence is committed by a natural person, that
person shall be liable, on conviction to a fine not exceeding one
million penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years, or to both.
PART V
REGULATION OF DATA CONTROLLERS, DATA PROCESSORS AND DATA
AUDITORS
Prohibition
from
controlling
or
processing
personal
data without
registration

19. (1) A person shall not control or process personal data
without registering as a data controller or a data processor under
this Act.

Application
for
registration
as data
processor or
data
controller

20. (1) A person who intends to process personal data shall
apply to the Data Protection Commissioner for registration as a
data controller or data processor in a prescribed manner and form
on payment of a prescribed fee.

(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, on conviction to a fine not exceeding five
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years or both.

(2) The Data Protection Commissioner may, within fourteen
days of receipt of an application under subsection (1), grant or
reject the application.
(3) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, where it rejects
an application under subsection (2), inform the applicant, in writing
and give reasons for the decision.

Registration
of data
controller
and data
processor

21. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, within
fourteen days of the approval of an application under section 20,
issue the applicant with a certificate of registration, if the applicant
meets the prescribed requirements.
(2) A registered data controller or data processor shall display
the certificate of registration issued under this Act in a conspicuous
place at the registered data controller’s or data processor’s principal
place of business and a certified copy of the certificate of registration
at every subsidiary premises where the registered data controller
or data processor carries on business.

Renewal of
certificate of
registration

22. (1) A registered data controller or data processor may three
months before the expiration of the validity of the certificate, apply
to the Authority for renewal of a certificate of registration in a
prescribed manner and form on payment of a prescribed fee.


(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, within thirty days
of receiving an application for the renewal of a certificate of
registration, approve or reject the application and give reasons where
it rejects the application for renewal of the certificate.
(3) A holder of a certificate of registration who submits an
application for the renewal of a certificate of registration in
accordance with subsection (1), shall continue to operate the
business or activity until a decision is made by the Data Protection
Commissioner on the application.
23. A registered data controller or data processor under this
Act shall notify the Data Protection Commissioner of any change
in the particulars relating to the registration within seven days of
the change.

Change in
details of
data
controller or
data
processor

24. (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, the Data
Protection Commissioner may suspend or cancel the registration
of a data controller or data processor if the registered data controller
or data processor—

Suspension
or
cancellation
of
registration

(a) obtained the registration on the basis of fraud,
misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact;
(b) has ceased to carry on business in the data processing or
controlling industry for a prescribed period;
(c) fails to comply with any term or condition of the certificate
of registration; or
(d) operates the registered business activity in contravention
of this Act or any other relevant written law.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, not less than thirty
days before suspending or cancelling registration of a data controller
or data processor in accordance with subsection (1), notify the
registered data controller or data processor of the intention to
suspend or cancel the registration giving reasons for its decision
and requesting the registered data controller or data processor to
show cause, within a period as the Data Protection Commissioner
shall specify in the notice, why the registration of the data controller
or data processor shall not be suspended or cancelled.
(3) Where the Data Protection Commissioner is not satisfied
with the reasons advanced by the data controller or data processor
under subsection (2), the Data Protection Commissioner shall
proceed to suspend or cancel, the registration stating the reasons
for the suspension or cancellation.

(4) Where a certificate of registration is cancelled or
suspended, the Data Protection Commissioner shall prescribe
conditions with which the data collected from the data subjects will
be processed.
(5) A data controller or data processor who contravenes
subsection (4) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a
fine not exceeding one million penalty units or to imprisonment for
a term of five years.
Reregistration

25. Where a certificate of registration is cancelled or suspended
under section 24, the holder of the certificate of registration may
apply to the Data Protection Commissioner for re-registration in a
prescribed form and manner on payment of a prescribed fee.

Surrender of
certificate of
registration

26. (1) Where a registered data controller or data processor
decides not to continue providing the services, the data controller
or data processor shall notify the Data Protection Commissioner in
writing.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall prescribe terms
and conditions on which the certificate of registration shall be
surrendered.
(3) Where a certificate of registration is surrendered under sub
section (1), the certificate of registration shall lapse, and the data
controller or data processor shall cease to be entitled to any benefits
obtainable under the certificate of registration.
(4) A data controller or data processor who fails to adhere to
the terms and conditions of surrender in subsection (2) commits an
offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one
million penalty units or to imprisonment for a term of ten years.

Exemption
from
registration

27. The Data Protection Commissioner may, by declaration,
exempt a person for a limited or unlimited period of time, from the
requirement to hold a certificate of registration to process personal
data.

Power to
forbear

28. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner may forbear from
applying to a data controller any provision of this Part, where the
Data Protection Commissioner considers that forbearance is
consistent with the objects of this Act.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, where it decides
to forbear from applying any provision, immediately, publish a notice
of forbearance in the Gazette, setting out the details of and the
reasons for, the decision.

PART VI
DATA AUDITORS
29. The Data Protection Commissioner shall licence data
auditors in the prescribed manner and form on payment of the
prescribed fee.

Data auditors

30. (1) A person who intends to provide data auditing services
under this Act shall apply to the Data Protection Commissioner for
a licence in the prescribed manner and form on payment of the
prescribed fee.

Application
for licence

(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, within sixty days
of receipt of an application, grant or reject the application.
(3) Where the Data Protection Commissioner fails to make a
decision within the period referred to under subsection (2), except
as otherwise provided under this Act, the application shall be
deemed to have been granted.
(4) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, where it rejects
an application for a licence, inform the applicant in writing stating
the reasons for the rejection.
(5) The Data Protection Commissioner may request for further
particulars in respect of an application.
(6) Where the Data Protection Commissioner requests for
particulars referred to in subsection (5), the period referred to in
subsection (2) stops running.
31. A licence under this Act shall only be issued to an applicant
that possesses the relevant technical capabilities determined by
the Data Protection Commissioner.
32. A licence issued under this Act shall—

Issue of
licences

Conditions of
licence

(a) contain the terms and conditions of the licence; and
(b) be valid for the period as maybe prescribed.
33. (1) A licensee may, at any time during the validity of the
licence, apply to the Data Protection Commissioner for variation
of the terms and conditions of the licence or any matter relating to
the licence.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall consider the
application referred to in subsection (1) and may grant or reject the
application, and shall give reasons to the applicant where it rejects
the application.

Variation of
licence

(3) The Data Protection Commissioner may vary the licence
or the terms and conditions of a licence where—
(a) the variation is necessary in the public interest; or
(b) the variation is necessary to address the concerns of the
members of the public;
(4) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, before making
any variation of the terms and conditions of a licence under this
section, give notice to the licensee—
(a) stating that it proposes to make variations in the manner
specified in the notice; and
(b) specifying the time, not being more than fourteen days
from the date of service of the notice on the Licensee,
within which written representation in respect of the
proposed variation may be made to the Data Protection
Commissioner by the licensee.
(5) Compensation shall not be payable by the Data Protection
Commissioner to a licensee for any variation to a licence.
Surrender of
licence

34. (1) Where a licensee decides not to continue providing
the services relating to the licence, the licensee shall notify the
Data Protection Commissioner in writing and shall agree with the
Data Protection Commissioner on the terms and conditions of the
surrender of the licence, with particular reference to anything done
or any benefit obtained under the licence.
(2) Where a licence is surrendered under sub section (1), the
licence shall lapse, and the licensee shall cease to be entitled to any
benefits obtainable under the licence.
(3) Where a licence is surrendered under subsection (1), the
licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees paid with respect
to the licence.

Transfer of
licence

35. (1) A licensee shall not cede, pledge, encumber or
otherwise dispose of a licence.
(2) A licensee may transfer or assign a licence with the prior
approval of the Data Protection Commissioner.
(3) An application for approval to transfer or assign a licence
shall be made to the Data Protection Commissioner.
(4) The Data Protection Commissioner may, within thirty days
of receipt of the application—

(a) approve the application on such terms and conditions as
it may determine; or
(b) reject the application in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
36.

(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Data
Protection Commissioner may suspend or cancel a
licence if the holder:

(a) obtained the licence by fraud or submission of false
information or statements;
(b) contravenes this Act, any other written law relating to
the licence or any terms and conditions of the licence;
(c) fails to comply with a decision or guidelines issued by the
Data Protection Commissioner;
(d) enters into receivership or liquidation or takes any action
for voluntary winding up or dissolution;
(e) enters into any scheme of arrangement, other than for
the purpose of reconstruction or amalgamation, on terms
and within such period as may previously have been
approved in writing by the Data Protection
Commissioner;
(f) is the subject of any order that is made by a court or
tribunal for its compulsory winding up or dissolution;
(g) has ceased to fulfil the eligibility requirements under this
Act; or
(h) the suspension or cancellation is in the public interest.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall before suspending
or cancelling the licence in accordance with this section, give
written notice to the holder thereof of its intention to suspend or
cancel the licence and shall—
(a) give the reasons for the intended suspension or
cancellation; and
(b) require the holder to show cause, within a period of not
more than thirty days, why the licence should not be
suspended or cancelled.
(3) The Data Protection Commissioner shall not suspend or
cancel a licence under this section if the licensee takes remedial
measures to the satisfaction of the Data Protection Commissioner
within the period referred to in subsection(2).

Suspension
and
cancellation

(4) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, in making its final
determination on the suspension or cancellation of the licence
consider submissions made by the licensee under subsection(2).
(5 The Data Protection Commissioner may suspend or cancel
a licence if the holder after being notified under subsection (2) fails
to show cause or does not take remedial measures, to the
satisfaction of the Data Protection Commissioner within the time
specified in that subsection.
(6) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, where it suspends
or cancels a licence under this section, publish the suspension or
revocation in the Register.
Renewal of
licence

37. (1) A licensee may, not less than three months before the
expiry of a licence, apply for a renewal of the licence in the
prescribed manner and form on payment of a prescribed fee.
(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall, where a licensee
makes an application under subsection (1), renew the licence if
the licensee —
(a) fulfils the eligibility requirements as prescribed under
this Act;
(b) at the time of the renewal, the licensee is compliant
with the terms and conditions of the licence, the
Guidelines issued by the Data Protection Commissioner
or any other relevant law.
(3) Where the Data Protection Commissioner rejects an
application for renewal of a licence, the Data Protection
Commissioner shall inform the licensee and give reasons for the
rejection.

Functions of
data auditor

38. The functions of a data auditor are to—
(a) promote adherence to principles of data protection by
controllers and processors of data;
(b) ensure that data controllers and data processors implement
adequate policies and procedures to regulate the
processing of personal data;
(c) enhance public and stakeholder awareness of data
protection principles and rights; and
(d) check that data controllers implement adequate safeguards
to prevent data leaks and data breaches from data
controllers and data processors.

PART VII
EXEMPTIONS FROM PRINCIPLES AND
RULES OF PROCESSING OF DATA
39. A data controller that processes personal data in the
interests of national security, defence and public order is exempt
from the provisions of part IV, except for section 12 (1) (c), (d),
(e) and (g).

National
security,
defence and
public order

40. (1) The processing of personal data in the interests of
prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of an offence
or any other contravention of law shall not be permitted unless it is
authorised by a written law and is necessary for, and proportionate
to, such interests being achieved.

Prevention,
detection,
investigation
and
prosecution
of
contraventions
of law

(2) Processing authorised by law under subsection (1) shall be
exempt from the provisions of Part IV, except section 12 (1) (c),
(d), (e) and (g).
(3) A data controller shall not retain personal data processed
under subsection (1) once the purpose of prevention, detection,
investigation or prosecution of an offence or other contravention
of law is complete except where that personal data is necessary
for the maintenance of any record or database which constitutes a
proportionate measure to prevent, detect, investigate or prosecute
an offence or class of offences in future.
41. (1) Where processing of personal data is necessary for
enforcing a legal right or claim, seeking a relief, defending a charge,
opposing a claim, or obtaining legal advice from a legal practitioner
in an impending legal proceeding, that processing shall be exempt
from the provisions of Part IV except section 12 (1) (c), (d), (e)
and (g).

Processing
for purposes
of legal
proceedings

(2) Where processing of personal data by a court or tribunal is
necessary for the exercise of any judicial function, that processing
is exempt from the provisions of part IV except section 12 (1) (c),
(d), (e) and (g).
42. (1) Where processing of personal data is necessary for
research, archiving, or statistical purposes, that processing is exempt
from the provisions of Part IV, except section 12 (1)(c), (d), (e)
and (g).
(2) Despite subsection (1), where sensitive personal data is being
processed for research purposes that relate to scientific or historical
research by a person other than a public body, that person shall not
process such sensitive personal data without the authorisation of
the Data Protection Commisioner.
(3) Where personal data is being processed for scientifc
research purposes by a person other than a public body, that person
shall ensure that the personal data is anonymised

Research,
archiving or
statistical
purposes

43. (1) Where the processing of personal data is necessary
for or relevant to a journalistic purpose, that processing is exempt
from the provisions of the Act, except—
(a) section 12(1)(c), (d), (e) and (g); and
(b) section 47.
(2) Subsection (1) applies only where a data controller can
demonstrate that the processing is in compliance with—
(a) the law regulating journalists in the Republic, or
(b) any code or guidelines issued by the Independent
Broadcasting Authority.
44. The requirement for the processing of personal data under
Processing to
be lawful and this Part shall be for the lawful and legitimate purposes.

Journalistic
purpose

legitimate

PART VIII
Record of
processing
activities

Data
protection
impact
assessment

DUTIES OF DATA CONTROLLER AND DATA PROCESSOR
45. (1) A data controller shall keep and maintain, in writing, a
record of—
(a) processing activities and meta data under its responsibility
in the prescribed manner and form; and
(b) all categories of processing activities carried out in the
prescribed manner and form.
(2) A data controller shall make the record available to the Data
Protection Commissioner on demand.
46. (1) A data controller shall, where a type of processing
uses new technologies, taking into account the nature, scope, context
and purposes of the processing, is likely to result in a high risk to
the rights and freedoms of an individual, prior to the processing,
carry out an assessment of the impact of the envisaged processing
operations on the protection of personal data.
(2) A data protection impact assessment under subsection (1)
is required where —
(a) personal data is procecessed using an automated
processing system, including profiling, which produces
legal effects concerning the natural person or similarly
significantly affects that natural person;
(b) processing on a large scale of sensitive personal data, or
of personal data relating to criminal convictions and
offences; or
(c) a systematic monitoring of a publicly accessible area on a
large scale.

(3) Despite subsection (2), the Data Protection Commissioner
shall establish and make public a list of the kind of processing
operations which are subject to the requirement for a data protection
impact assessment under subsection (1).
(4) An impact assessment under subsection (1) shall be in a
prescribed manner and form.
(5) A data controller shall, where necessary, carry out a review
to assess if processing is performed in accordance with the data
protection impact assessment where there is a change of the risk
represented by processing operations.
47. (1) A data controller or data processor, shall provide
guarantees regarding the technical and organisational security
measures employed to protect the personal data associated with
the processing undertaken and ensure strict adherence to such
measures.
(2) A data controller or the data processor shall, having regard
to the nature, scope and purpose of processing personal data
undertaken, the risks associated with such processing, and the
likelihood and severity of the harm that may result from such
processing, implement appropriate security safeguards including—
(a) maintaining integrity of personal data using methods
including pseudonymisation and encryption;
(b) ensuring ongoing confidentiality, integrity and
implementation of measures necessary to protect the
integrity of personal data;
(c) measures necessary to prevent misuse, unauthorised
access to, modification, disclosure or destruction of
personal data; and
(d) implementation of appropriate data protection policies.
(3) A data controller and data processor shall undertake a
periodic review of security safeguard in accordance with guidelines
issued by the Data Protection Commissioner.
(4) Where processing is to be carried out on behalf of a data
controller, the data controller shall only use processors providing
sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate technical and
organisational measures in a manner that ensures that the processing
will meet the requirements of this Act and protect the rights of the
data subject.

Security of
processing

Appointment
of data
protection
officer

48. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a data controller and data
processor shall appoint a data protection officer.

Notification
of security
breach

49. (1) A data controller shall notify the Data Protection
Commissioner within twenty-four hours of any security breach
affecting personal data processed.

(2) A data protection officer shall be appointed in accordance
with the guidelines issued by the Data Protection Commissioner.

(2) A data processor shall notify the data controller, as soon as
practicable of any security breach affecting personal data processed
on behalf of the data controller.
(3) A data controller or data processor shall notify the data
subject, as soon as practicable of any security breach affecting
personal data processed.
Accountability

50.

A data controller and data processor shall—

(a) take necessary measures to comply with the principles
and obligations specified in this Act; and
(b) have the necessary internal mechanisms in place for
demonstrating such compliance to both data subjects
and to the Data Protection Commissioner.
Data
Retention

51. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a data controller
and data processor shall keep personal information for as long as
that personal information is used for the specific purpose for which
the personal information was collected and for as long as the
personal information is relevant for that purpose and for a period
of at least one year thereafter or other period that may be prescribed.
(2) A data controller and a data processor shall keep a record
of the process and a record of the purpose for which the personal
information was collected and third parties to whom and when the
personal information was disclosed.

Duties of
data
processor

52. (1) A data processor shall not engage another data
processor without prior specific or general written authorisation of
the data controller.
(2) A data processor shall, where a data controller is granted
general authorisation to engage another data processor, inform the
data controller of any intended changes concerning the addition or
replacement of other data processors, thereby giving the data
controller the opportunity to object to those changes.

(3) Processing by a data processor shall be governed by a
contract that sets out the subject matter and duration of the
processing, the nature and purpose of the processing, the type of
personal data and categories of data subjects, the obligations and
rights of the controller and any other matter, as prescribed.
(4) The Data Protection Commissioner may, for the purposes
of this section, issue guidelines specifying further obligations and
any other matters regarding data processors.
53. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a person Nonshall not disclose or otherwise cause any other person to receive disclosure of
personal data
the content or nature of any personal data that has been collected.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), a data controller or data processor
who seeks to disclose personal data shall, prior to its disclosure,
obtain the consent of the data subject.
(3) A data controller or data processor, who seeks to disclose
personal data, shall inform the data subject, prior to a disclosure of
personal data under this section, of the following details in respect
of the data subject’s personal data:
(a) when and to whom it will be disclosed;
(b) the purpose of its disclosure;
(c) the security practices, privacy policies and other policies,
if any, that will protect it; and
(d) the procedure for recourse in case of any grievance in
relation to it.
(4) A data controller or data processor shall not disclose, without
consent of the data subject, personal data unless it is necessary to
prevent—
(a) a reasonable threat to national security, defence or public
order; or
(b) investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence.
(5) A person who contravenes a provision of this section commits
an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years or to both.
54. (1) Where two or more data controllers jointly determine Joint
the purposes and means of processing data, the joint controllers controllers
shall enter into an agreement which reflects the respective roles
and relationships of the joint controllers’ as they relate to the data
subject.

(2) An agreement entered into under subsection (1) shall be
made available to the data subject.
(3) Joint data controllers shall be jointly and severally liable to
the data subject.
Offence by
data
controller

55. (1) A body corporate that contravenes the provisions of
this part commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to two
percent of annual turnover of the preceding financial year or to
two million penalty units, whichever is higher.
(2) Where an offence under subsection (1) is committed by a
natural person, that person shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine
not exceeding one million penalty units or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding ten years, or to both.

Personal data
in legal
proceedings

56. A person shall not process personal data in legal
proceedings, except—
(a) under the supervision of a public body discharging its duty
if the processing is necessary for those legal
proceedings;
(b) where the processing is necessitated by litigation; or
(c) by a legal practitioner to the extent that the processing is
necessary for the protection of the legal practitioner’s
clients’ interests.

Notification

57. A data controller or data processor shall notify the Data
Protection Commissioner of any third party agreement that allows
the third party to trade on the profile of a data subject.
PART IX
RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT

Right of
access and
notification

58. (1) A data subject has the right to obtain from the data
controller, confirmation as to whether or not personal data
concerning that data subject is being processed.
(2) A data subject may, where that data subject’s personal data
is being processed, access in a manner that the data subject
understands the following information:
(a) the purpose of the processing, the category of data the
processing relates to, and the categories of recipients
the data is disclosed to;
(b) envisaged period for which the personal data shall be
stored, where possible or if not possible, the criteria
used to determine that period;

(c) data being processed, as well as the source of that data;
and
(d) information about the basic logic involved in any automatic
processing of data relating to the data in case of
automated decision making.
(3) A data subject has the right to notification of all third parties
to whom that data subject’s personal data has been disclosed and
the measures put in place to safeguard personal information of that
data subject.
(4) A data subject shall access that data subject’s personal data
in accordance with the relevant written law relating to access to
information.
(5) Where sensitive personal data is processed for the purpose
of scientific research, informing the data subject may be postponed
until the research is concluded, if —
(a) informing the data subject would significantly prejudice
the research;
(b) there is no evident risk of infringement of the data subject’s
right to protection of the data subject’s privacy; and
(c) the data was collected initially on the basis of consent.
(6) A data controller may provide a copy of the personal data
undergoing processing at no cost for the initial data and at a
reasonable fee based on administrative costs for additional copies
of the data.
(7) Where the data subject makes a data request by electronic
means, and unless otherwise requested by the data subject, the
information shall be provided in a commonly used electronic format.
(8) The right to obtain a copy of personal data under subsection
(5) shall not be enforced where that enforcement prejudices the
rights and freedoms of others.
59. (1) The data subject has the right to, rectification of
inaccurate personal data concerning the data subject as soon as
practicable.
(2) A data subject shall taking into account the purposes of
the processing, have the right to have incomplete personal data
completed.

Right to
rectification

Data Protection

60. (1) The data subject has the right to erasure of personal
data of that data subject as soon as practicable and the data
controller shall have the obligation to erase personal data without
undue delay where the—
(a) personal data is no longer necessary in relation to the
purposes for which it was collected or otherwise
processed;
(b) data subject, or a person holding parental responsibility,
where the data subject is a child, withdraws consent
and there is no other legal ground for the processing;
(c) data subject objects to the processing and there are no
overriding legitimate grounds for the processing, or the
data subject objects to the processing unless the data
controller is otherwise permitted by the provisions of
this Act;
(d) personal data has been unlawfully processed; or
(e) personal data has to be erased for compliance with a
legal obligation in the Republic to which the data
controller is subject.
(2) A data controller shall, where the data controller has made
the personal data public, take all reasonable steps to inform a data
processor and third party processing that data by virtue of that
publication, that the data subject has requested the erasure of any
links to, or copy or replication of, that personal data.

Right of
objection

61. (1) Subject to this Act, a data subject may object, to
processing of that data subject’s personal data.
(2) A data controller shall not, where a data subject objects to
the processing of that data subject’s personal data, process the
personal data objected to under subsection (1) unless the data
controller is permitted by the provisions of any other written law.
(3) A data subject may, where personal data is processed for
direct marketing purposes, object to processing of that data subject’s
personal data.
(4) Where a data subject objects to the processing of personal
data for direct marketing purposes, the personal data shall no longer
be processed for that purpose but may be processed for any other
lawful purpose. 

(5) A data controller shall on the first communication with the
data subject, expressly bring the rights of the data subject to the
attention of the data subject and present the information clearly
and separately from any other information.
62. (1) A data subject shall not be subject to a decision based
solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces
legal effects concerning that data subject or similarly affects that
data subject.

Decision
taken on
basis of
automatic
data
processing

(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply if the decision is—
(a) necessary for entering into, or performance of, a contract
between the data subject and a data controller;
(b) authorised by any written law; or
(c) based on the data subject’s explicit consent.
(3) A data controller shall, in cases under subsection (2),
implement suitable measures to safeguard the data subject’s rights
and freedoms and legitimate interests, including the right to obtain
human intervention on the part of the data controller for purposes
of enabling the data subject to express the data subject’s point of
view and contest the decision.
(4) Automated data processing shall not be undertaken where
the processing involves sensitive personal data unless—
(a) the data subject has expressly consented to that processing;
(b) the processing is in the public interest; or
(c) the processing is permitted by any written law and suitable
measures to safeguard the data subject’s rights and
freedoms and legitimate interests are in place.
63. (1) A data subject may restrict a data controller from
processing that data subject’s personal data where the—
(a) accuracy of the personal data is contested by the data
subject, for a period enabling the data controller to verify
the accuracy of the personal data;
(b) data controller no longer needs the personal data for the
purposes of the processing, but it is required by the data
subject for the establishment, exercise or defence of
legal claims;
(c) data subject has objected to processing pursuant to section
60(1)(c) pending the verification whether the legitimate grounds
of the data controller override those ofthe data subject.

Right to
restriction of
processing

(2) Where processing has been restricted under subsection
(1), that personal data shall, with the exception of storage, only be
processed with the data subject’s consent or for the establishment,
exercise or defence of legal claims or for reasons of important
public interest or where the law compels that processing.
(3) A data subject who has obtained a restriction on the
processing of that data subject’s personal data pursuant to subsection
(1) shall be informed by the data controller before the restriction of
processing that data is lifted.
Information
when
personal
data
collected
directly from
data subject

64. A data controller shall where personal data relating to the
data subject is collected directly from the data subject, concurrently
provide the data subject with the following information, unless it is
established that the data subject is in receipt of that information:
(a) the name and address of the data controller;
(b) the purpose of the processing;
(c) if it is obtained for the purpose of direct marketing,
existence of the right to object, to the intended processing
of personal data relating to that data subject;
(d) where applicable, the fact that the controller intends to
transfer personal data to a third country or international
organisation and the safeguards put in place for that
transfer;
(e) whether compliance with the request for information is
compulsory or not, as well as what the consequences
of the failure to comply are;
(f) taking into account the specific circumstances in which
the data is collected, any supporting information, as
necessary to ensure fair processing for the data subject,
such as—
(i) the recipients or categories of recipients of the
data; and
(ii) the existence of the right to access and rectify
the personal data relating to that data subject,
except where that additional information, taking
into account the specific circumstances in
which the data is collected, is not necessary to
guarantee accurate processing.

Right to data
portability

65. (1) A data subject has the right to receive that data subject’s
personal data in a structured, commonly used, machine readable or
otherwise legible format and may transmit that data to another
data controller.

(2) A data subject has the right to have the data subject’s
personal data transmitted directly from one data controller to another,
where technically or otherwise feasible.
66. A data controller shall communicate any rectification or
erasure of personal data or restriction of processing carried out in
accordance with this Act to each recipient to whom the personal
data have been disclosed, where practicable.

Notification
obligation

67. The rights of a data subject under this Part shall, to the
extent necessary, not apply where processing is—

D e r o ga t i o n
from rights

(a) for compliance with a legal obligation which requires
processing by any written law to which the data
controller is subject;
(b) for the performance of a task carried out in the public
interest;
(c) in the exercise of official authority vested in the data
controller;
(d) for scientific or historical research purposes; or
(e) for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
68. A data subject may lodge a complaint with the Data
Protection Commissioner if the data subject considers that the
processing of personal data by a data controller or data processor
contravenes this Act.

Complaints

69. A person who is aggrieved with the decision of the Data
Protection Commissioner may appeal to the High Court within thirty
days of the Data Protection Commission’s decision.

Appeals

PART X
TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA OUTSIDE
THE REPUBLIC
70. (1) A data controller shall process and store personal data
on a server or data centre located in the Republic.
(2) Despite subsection (1), the Minister may prescribe
categories of personal data that may be stored outside the Republic.
(3) Despite subsection (2), sensitive personal data shall be
processed and stored in a server or data centre located in the
Republic.

Cross-border
transfer of
personal
data

No. 3 of
Conditions
for Crossborder
transfer of
personal data


71. (1) Personal data other than personal data categorised in
accordance with section 70(2) may be transferred outside the
Republic where—
(a) the data subject has consented and
(i) the transfer is made subject to standard contracts
or intragroup schemes that have been approved
by the Data Protection Commissioner; or
(ii) the Minister, has prescribed that transfers outside
the Republic is permissible; or
(b) the Data Protection Commissioner approves a particular
transfer or set of transfers as permissible due to a
situation of necessity.
(2) The Minister may, by statutory instrument, prescribe the
criteria for cross border data transfers under subsection (1)(a)(ii)
where the Minister considers that —
(a) the relevant personal data shall be subject to an adequate
level of protection, having regard to the applicable laws
and international agreements; and
(b) the enforcement of data protection laws by authorities
with appropriate jurisdiction is effective.
(3) The Data Protection Commissioner shall monitor the
circumstances applicable to data that has been transferred outside
the Republic under subsection (1)(a)(ii)in order to review decisions
made under this Act.
(4) Despite subsection (2), personal data may be transferred
outside the Republic—
(a) in case of an emergency, to a particular person or entity
engaged in the provision of health services or emergency
services;
(b) where the data subject has explicitly consented to that
transfer of sensitive personal data; and
(c) to a particular international organisation or country which
complies with subsection (1)(a)(ii), where the Data
Protection Commissioner is satisfied that the transfer
or class of transfers is necessary for any class of data
controllers or data subjects and does not hamper the
effective enforcement of this Act.
(5) The Data Protection Commissioner shall approve standard
contracts or intra-group schemes under subsection (1)(a) where

contracts or schemes effectively protect the rights of data subjects
under this Act, including in relation with further transfers from the
transferees of personal data under this subsection to any other
person or entity.
(6) Where a data controller seeks to transfer personal data
subject to a standard contract or intragroup scheme under
subsection (1)(a), it shall certify and periodically report to the Data
Protection Commissioner as may be specified, that the transfer is
made under a contract that adheres to these standard contractual
clauses or intragroup schemes and that it shall bear any liability for
the harm caused due to any noncompliance with the standard
contractual clauses or intragroup schemes by the transferee.
PART XI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
72. A data subject who has suffered damage as a result of an
infringement of that data subject’s right under this Act, may receive
compensation from the data controller or data processor as
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction for the damage
suffered.
73. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person
commits an offence if that person unlawfully discloses sensitive
personal data to another person.

Right to
compensation

Offences

(2) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (1) is
liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand
penalty units, or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding two years,
or to both.
74. Where the Data Protection Commissioner is satisfied, after
an investigation, or where a person admits that the person has
committed an offence under this Act, the Data Protection
Commissioner may, compound the offence by collecting from that
person a sum of money that the Data Protection Commissioner
considers appropriate, but not exceeding fifty percent of the
maximum amount of the fine to which that person would have
been liable on conviction.

Power of
Data
Protection
Commissioner
to compound
certain
offences

75. (1) Where there has been a conviction for any of the
offences under this Act, the court may pronounce the forfeiture of
the medium containing the personal data to which the offence relates
or make any other order as it deems fit.

Forfeiture

(2) A court may order forfeiture or deletion where the medium
containing the personal data does not belong to the person convicted.

(3) A court may, on conviction for an offence under this Act,
impose a prohibition to manage any processing of personal data,
directly or through an intermediary, for a period that the court
determines.
Offence by
principal
officer
shareholder
or partner of
body
corporate or
unincorporate
body

76. Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body
corporate or unincorporate body, with the knowledge, consent or
connivance of the director, manager, shareholder or partner, of that
body corporate or unincorporate body, that director, manager,
shareholder or partner of the body corporate or unincorporate body
commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to the penalty
specified for that offence.

General
penalty

77. A person who commits an offence under this Act for which
a specified penalty is not provided, is liable, on conviction, to a fine
not exceeding three hundred thousand penalty units or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or to both.

Code of
conduct

78. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner may prepare a
code of conduct for data controllers, data processors and data
auditors.
(2) A code of conduct under subsection (1) shall be binding on
data controllers and data processors and shall include—
(a) the provision of information to data subjects regarding
confidentiality;
(b) the advertising or representation of services;
(c) fair, accessible format and transparent processing of
personal data for all data subjects; and
(d) any other matter relating to the processing of personal
data under this Act.
(3) The Data Protection Commissioner shall publish the code
of conduct in a Gazette or website of general circulation in the
Republic for public information.
(4) A code of conduct published under subsection (3), shall
be effective from the date of its publication.
(5) A person who contravenes the code of conduct under
subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a
fine not exceeding two hundred thousand penalty units or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or to both.

Guidelines

79. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner may issue
guidelines that are necessary for the better carrying out of the
provisions of this Act.

(2) The Data Protection Commissioner shall publish all the
guidelines issued under this Act in a daily newspaper of general
circulation, and the guidelines shall not take effect until they are so
published.
(3) The guidelines issued under subsection (1) shall be binding
on all persons regulated under this Act.
(4) A person who contravenes the guidelines under subsection
(1), commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not
exceeding two hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years or to both.
80. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner shall keep and
maintain a Register in which the Data Protection Commissioner
shall keep information that it may determine.

Register

(2) The Register under subsection (1), shall be kept at a place
that the Data Protection Commissioner may determine, and shall
be open to inspection by the public during normal working hours on
payment of a prescribed fee.
81. (1) The Data Protection Commissioner or an independent
data auditor licensed by the Data Protection Commissioner under
this Act shall, unless otherwise provided under this Act, audit the
policies of a data controller and the conduct of processing of personal
data annually.

Auditing of
data
controller

(2) Where a data controller has been authorised to store data
on a server or data centre located outside the Republic, the cost of
auditing the server or data controller shall be borne by the data
controller.
82. (1) The Minister may, by statutory instrument make
regulations for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the
regulations may make provision for—
(a) limitation of obligations and rights where that limitation is
necessary to preserve
(i) state security;
(ii) defence;
(iii) public safety including the economic wellbeing or
interest of the State when the processing
operation relates to State security matters; and
(iv) the prevention, investigation, and proof of criminal
offence;

Regulations

(b) the notification of security breaches;
(c)

licensing of data auditors;

(d) processing of genetic, biometric and health data;
(e)

processing of unique patient identifier;

(f)

personal data of children;

(g) data retention; and
(h) registration of data controllers and data processors.