RECOMMENDATION OF THE COUNCIL
CONCERNING GUIDELINES GOVERNING THE
PROTECTION OF PRIVACY AND TRANSBORDER
FLOWS OF PERSONAL DATA
(23rd September, 1980)
THE COUNCIL,
Having regard to articles 1(c), 3(a) and 5(b) of the Convention on the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development of 14th December,
1960;
RECOGNISING:
that, although national laws and policies may differ, Member countries
have a common interest in protecting privacy and individual liberties, and
in reconciling fundamental but competing values such as privacy and the
free flow of information;
that automatic processing and transborder flows of personal data create
new forms of relationships among countries and require the development
of compatible rules and practices;
that transborder flows of personal data contribute to economic and social
development;
that domestic legislation concerning privacy protection and transborder
flows of personal data may hinder such transborder flows;
Determined to advance the free flow of information between Member countries
and to avoid the creation of unjustified obstacles to the development of
economic and social relations among Member countries;
12
RECOMMENDS:
1. That Member countries take into account in their domestic legislation
the principles concerning the protection of privacy and individual liberties set
forth in the Guidelines contained in the Annex to this Recommendation which
is an integral part thereof;
2. That Member countries endeavour to remove or avoid creating, in the
name of privacy protection, unjustified obstacles to transborder flows of
personal data;
3. That Member countries co-operate in the implementation of the
Guidelines set forth in the Annex;
4. That Member countries agree as soon as possible on specific
procedures of consultation and co-operation for the application of these
Guidelines.
13
Annex to the Recommendation of the Council of 23rd September 1980
GUIDELINES GOVERNING THE PROTECTION OF
PRIVACY AND TRANSBORDER FLOWS OF
PERSONAL DATA
PART ONE. GENERAL
Definitions
1. For the purposes of these Guidelines:
a) "data controller" means a party who, according to domestic law, is
competent to decide about the contents and use of personal data
regardless of whether or not such data are collected, stored,
processed or disseminated by that party or by an agent on its
behalf;
b) "personal data" means any information relating to an identified or
identifiable individual (data subject);
c) "transborder flows of personal data" means movements of
personal data across national borders.
Scope of Guidelines
2. These Guidelines apply to personal data, whether in the public or
private sectors, which, because of the manner in which they are processed, or
because of their nature or the context in which they are used, pose a danger to
privacy and individual liberties.
14
3. These Guidelines should not be interpreted as preventing:
a) the application, to different categories of personal data, of
different protective measures depending upon their nature and the
context in which they are collected, stored, processed or
disseminated;
b) the exclusion from the application of the Guidelines of personal
data which obviously do not contain any risk to privacy and
individual liberties; or
c) the application of the Guidelines only to automatic processing of
personal data.
4. Exceptions to the Principles contained in Parts Two and Three of
these Guidelines, including those relating to national sovereignty, national
security and public policy ("ordre public"), should be:
a) as few as possible, and
b) made known to the public.
5. In the particular case of Federal countries the observance of these
Guidelines may be affected by the division of powers in the Federation.
6. These Guidelines should be regarded as minimum standards which are
capable of being supplemented by additional measures for the protection of
privacy and individual liberties.
PART TWO. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL APPLICATION
Collection Limitation Principle
7. There should be limits to the collection of personal data and any such
data should be obtained by lawful and fair means and, where appropriate, with
the knowledge or consent of the data subject.
15
Data Quality Principle
8. Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for which they are to
be used, and, to the extent necessary for those purposes, should be accurate,
complete and kept up-to-date.
Purpose Specification Principle
9. The purposes for which personal data are collected should be specified
not later than at the time of data collection and the subsequent use limited to the
fulfilment of those purposes or such others as are not incompatible with those
purposes and as are specified on each occasion of change of purpose.
Use Limitation Principle
10. Personal data should not be disclosed, made available or otherwise
used for purposes other than those specified in accordance with Paragraph 9
except:
a) with the consent of the data subject; or
b) by the authority of law.
Security Safeguards Principle
11. Personal data should be protected by reasonable security safeguards
against such risks as loss or unauthorised access, destruction, use, modification
or disclosure of data.
Openness Principle
12. There should be a general policy of openness about developments,
practices and policies with respect to personal data. Means should be readily
available of establishing the existence and nature of personal data, and the main
purposes of their use, as well as the identity and usual residence of the data
controller.
16
Individual Participation Principle
13. An individual should have the right:
a) to obtain from a data controller, or otherwise, confirmation of
whether or not the data controller has data relating to him;
b) to have communicated to him, data relating to him
i) within a reasonable time;
ii) at a charge, if any, that is not excessive;
iii) in a reasonable manner; and
iv) in a form that is readily intelligible to him;
c) to be given reasons if a request made under subparagraphs (a) and
(b) is denied, and to be able to challenge such denial; and
d) to challenge data relating to him and, if the challenge is successful
to have the data erased, rectified, completed or amended.
Accountability Principle
14. A data controller should be accountable for complying with measures
which give effect to the principles stated above.
PART THREE. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL
APPLICATION: FREE FLOW AND LEGITIMATE RESTRICTIONS
15. Member countries should take into consideration the implications for
other Member countries of domestic processing and re-export of personal data.
16. Member countries should take all reasonable and appropriate steps to
ensure that transborder flows of personal data, including transit through a
Member country, are uninterrupted and secure.
17. A Member country should refrain from restricting transborder flows
of personal data between itself and another Member country except where the
17
latter does not yet substantially observe these Guidelines or where the re-export
of such data would circumvent its domestic privacy legislation. A Member
country may also impose restrictions in respect of certain categories of personal
data for which its domestic privacy legislation includes specific regulations in
view of the nature of those data and for which the other Member country
provides no equivalent protection.
18. Member countries should avoid developing laws, policies and
practices in the name of the protection of privacy and individual liberties, which
would create obstacles to transborder flows of personal data that would exceed
requirements for such protection.
PART FOUR. NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION
19. In implementing domestically the principles set forth in Parts Two and
Three, Member countries should establish legal, administrative or other
procedures or institutions for the protection of privacy and individual liberties in
respect of personal data. Member countries should in particular endeavour to:
a) adopt appropriate domestic legislation;
b) encourage and support self-regulation, whether in the form of
codes of conduct or otherwise;
c) provide for reasonable means for individuals to exercise their
rights;
d) provide for adequate sanctions and remedies in case of failures to
comply with measures which implement the principles set forth in
Parts Two and Three; and
e) ensure that there is no unfair discrimination against data subjects.
18
PART FIVE. INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
20. Member countries should, where requested, make known to other
Member countries details of the observance of the principles set forth in these
Guidelines. Member countries should also ensure that procedures for
transborder flows of personal data and for the protection of privacy and
individual liberties are simple and compatible with those of other Member
countries which comply with these Guidelines.
21. Member countries should establish procedures to facilitate:
i) information exchange related to these Guidelines, and
ii) mutual assistance in the procedural and investigative matters
involved.
22. Member countries should work towards the development of
principles, domestic and international, to govern the applicable law in the case
of transborder flows of personal data.

