
1993, No. 28
An Act to promote and protect individual privacy in
general accordance with the Recommendation of the
Council of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development Concerning Guidelines
Governing the Protection of Privacy and Transborder
Flows of Personal Data, and, in particular,(a) To establish certain principles with respect to(i) The collection, use, and disclosure, by
public and private sector agencies, of
information relating to individuals; and
(ii) Access by each individual to information
relating to that individual and held by public
and private sector agencies; and
(b) To provide for the appointment of a Privacy
Commissioner to investigate complaints about
interferences with individual privacy; and
(c) To provide for matters incidental thereto
[17 May 1993

BE IT ENACTED by the Parliament of New Zealand as follows:
1. Short Tide and commenceDlent-(I) This Act may be
cited as the Privacy Act 1993.
(2) Except as provided by section 31 (2) of this Act, this Act
shall come into force on the 1st day of July 1993.
PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

2. Interpretation-(I) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,

"Action" includes failure to act; and also includes any
policy or practice:
"Agency" (a) Means any person or body of persons, whether
corporate or unincorporate, and whether in the
public sector or the private sector; and, for the
avoidance of doubt, includes a Department; but
(b) Does not include(i) The Sovereign; or
(ii) The Governor·General or the Administrator
of the Government; or
(iii) The House of Representatives; or
(iv) A member of Parliament in his or her official
capacity; or
(v) The Parliamentary Service Commission; or
(vi) The Parliamentary Service, except in relation
to personal information about any
employee or former employee of that
agency in his or her capacity as such an
employee; or
(vii) In relation to its judicial functions, a court; or
(viii) In relation to its judicial functions, a
Tribunal; or
(ix) An Ombudsman; or
(x) A Royal Commission; or
(xi) A commission of inquiry appointed by an
Order in Council made under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908; or
(xii) A commission of inquiry or board of inquiry
or court of inquiry or committee of inquiry
appointed, pursuant to, and not by, any
provision of an Act, to inquire into a
specified matter; or
(xiii) In relation to its news activities, any news
medium:
"Collect" does not include receipt of unsolicited
information:
"Commissioner" means the Privacy Commissioner
appointed under section 12 of this Act:
"Complaints Review Tribunal" or "Tribunal" means the
Complaints Review Tribunal established under
section 45 of the Human Rights Commission Act
1977:
"Correct", in relation to personal information, means to
alter that information by way of correction, deletion,
or addition; and "correction" has a corresponding
meaning:
"Department" means a Government Department named
in Part I of the First Schedule to the Ombudsmen Act
1975:
"Deputy Commissioner" means the Deputy Privacy
Commissioner appointed under section 15 of this Act:
"Document" means a document in any form; and
includes(a) Any writing on any material:
(b) Any information recorded or stored by means
of any tape.recorder, computer, or other device; and
any material subsequently derived from information
so recorded or stored:
(c) Any label, marking, or other writing that
identifies or describes any thing of which it forms
part, or to which it is attached by any means:
(d) Any book, map, plan, graph, or drawing:
(e) Any photograph, film, negative, tape, or other
device in which one or more visual images are
embodied so as to be capable (with or without the aid
of some other equipment) of being reproduced:
"Enactment" means any provision of(a) Any Act of Parliament; or
(b) Any regulations within the meaning of the
Regulations (Disallowance) Act 1989 made by Order
in Council:
"Individual" means a natural person, other than a
deceased natural person:
"Individual concerned", in relation to personal
information, means the individual to whom the
information relates:
"Information matching programme" has the meaning
given to it by section 97 of this Act:
"Information privacy principle" or "principle" means any
of the information privacy principles set out in section
6 of this Act:
"Information privacy request" has the meaning given to it
by section 33 of this Act:
"Intelligence organisation" means(a) The New Zealand Security Intelligence Service;
and
(b) The Government Communications Security
Bureau

"International organisation" means any organisation of
States or Governments of States or any organ or
agency of any such organisation; and includes the
Commonwealth Secretariat:
"Local authority"(a) Means a local authority or public body named
or specified in the First Schedule to the Local
Government Official Information and Meetings Act
1987; and
(b) Includes(i) Any committee or subcommittee or standing
committee or special committee or joint
standing committee or joint special
committee which the local authority is
empowered to appoint under its standing
orders or rules of procedure or under any
enactment
or
Order
in
Council
constituting the local authority or
regulating its proceedings; and
(ii) A committee of the whole local authority:
"Minister" means a Minister of the Crown in his or her
official car,acity:
"News activity' means(a) The gathering of news, or the preparation or
compiling of articles or programmes of or concerning
news, observations on news, or current affairs, for the
purposes of dissemination to the public or any section
of the public:
(b) The dissemination, to the public or any section
of the public, of any article or programme of or
concerning(i) News:
(ii) Observations on news:
(iii) Current affairs:
"News medium" means any agency whose business, or
part of whose business, consists of a news activity;
but, in relation to principles 6 and 7, does not include
Radio New Zealand Limited or Television New
Zealand Limited:
"Ombudsman" means an Ombudsman appointed under
the Ombudsmen Act 1975:
"Organisation" (a) Means(i) An organisation named in Part 11 of the First
Schedule to the Ombudsmen Act 1975;
and
(ii) An organisation named in the First Schedule
to the Official Information Act 1982; and
(b) Includes(i) The Office of the Clerk of the House of
Representatives:
(ii) An intelligence organisation:
"Permanent resident of New Zealand" means a person
who(a) Resides in New Zealand; and
(b) Is not(i) A person to whom section 7 of the
Immigration Act 1987 applies; or
(ii) A person obliged, by or pursuant to that Act,
to leave New Zealand immediately or
within a specified time; or
(iii) Deemed for the purposes of that Act to be in
New Zealand unlawfully:
"Personal information" means information about an
identifiable individual; and includes information
contained in any register of deaths kept under the
Births and Deaths Registration Act 1951:
"Proceedings Commissioner" means the Proceedings
Commissioner appointed under section 7 (2A) of the
Human Rights Commission Act 1977:
"Public register" has the meaning given to it in section 58
of this Act:
"Public register privacy principle" has the meaning given
to it in section 58 of this Act:
"Public sector agency"(a) Means an agency that is a Minister, a
~aartment, an organisation, or a local authority;
(b) Includes any agency that is an unincorporated
body (being a board, council, committee, or other
body)(i) Which is established for the purpose of
assisting or advising, or performing
functions connected with, any public
sector agency within the meaning of
paragraph (a) of this definition; and
(ii) Which is so established in accordance with
the provisions of any enactment or by any
such public sector agency:
"Publicly available information"
means personal
information that is contained in a publicly available
publication:
"Publicly available publication" means a magazine, book,
newspaper, or other publication that is or will be
generally available to members of the public; and
includes a public register:
"Responsible Minister" means the Minister of Justice:
"Statutory officer" means a person(a) Holding or performing the duties of an office
established by an enactment; or
(b) Performing duties expressly conferred on that
person by virtue of that person's office by an
enactment:
"Unique identifier" means an identifier(a) That is assigned to an individual by an agency
for the purposes of the operations of the agency; and
(b) That uniquely identifies that individual in
relation to that agency;but, for the avoidance of doubt, does not include an
individual's name used to identify that individual:
"Working day" means any day of the week other than(a) Saturday, Sunday, Good Friday, Easter Monday,
Anzac Day, Labour Day, the Sovereign's birthday,
and Waitangi Day; and
(b) A day in the period commencing with the 25th
day of December in any year and ending with the
15th day of January in the following year.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the
fact that any body (being a commission of inquiry or board of
inquiry or court of inquiry or committee of inquiry appointed,
by any provision of an Act, to inquire into a specified matter) is
not excluded from the definition of the term "agency" in
subsection (1) of this section by virtue of subparagraph (xii) of
paragraph (b) of that definition does not mean that such a body
is not excluded from that definition by virtue of subparagraph
(vii) or subparagraph (viii) of that paragraph.
er. 1982, No. 156, s. 2; 1983, No. 83, s. 2; 1985, No. 128, s.
71 (3); 1987, No. 8, s. 2; 1987, No. 174, s. 2

S. Information held by agency-(I) Subject to subsection
(2) of this section, information that is held by an officer or
employee or member of an agency in that person's capacity as
such an officer or employee or member or in that person's
capacity as a statutory officer shall be deemed, for the purposes
of this Act, to be held by the agency of which that person is an
officer or employee or member.

(2) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section applies in respect
of any information that any officer or employee or member of
a public sector agency would not hold but for that person's
membership of, or connection with, a body other than a public
sector agency, except where that membership or connection is
in that person's capacity as an officer or an employee or a
member of that public sector agency or as a statutory officer.
(3) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section applies in respect
of any information that any officer or employee or member of
any agency (not being a public sector agency) would not hold
but for that person's membership of, or connection with, any
other agency, except where that membership or connection is
in that person's capacity as an officer or an employee or a
member of that first-mentioned agency.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, where an agency holds
information(a) Solely as agent; or
(b) For the sole purpose of safe custody; or
(c) For the sole purpose of processing the information on
behalf of another agency,and does not use or disclose the information for its own
purposes, the information shall be deemed to be held by the
agency on whose behalf that information is so held or, as the
case may be, is so processed.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 2 (2)-(4)
4. Actions of, and disclosure of infonnation to, staff of
agency, etc.-For the purposes of this Act, an action done by,
or information disclosed to, a person employed by, or in the
service of, an agency in the performance of the duties of the
person's employment shall be treated as having been done by,
or disclosed to, the agency.
Cf. Privacy Act 1988 (Aust.), s. 8 (1)
5. Act to bind the Crown-This Act binds the Crown.
PART 11
INFORMATION PRIvACY PRINCIPLES

6. Infonnation privacy principles-The information
privacy principles are as follows:

INFORMATION PRIVACY PRINCIPLES
PRINCIPLE 1

Purpose of collection of personal information
Personal information shall not be collected by any agency
unless(a) The information is collected for a lawful purpose
connected with a function or activity of the agency;
and
(b) The collection of the information is necessary for that
purpose.
PRINCIPLE 2
Source of personal information
(1) Where an agency collects personal information, the
agency shall collect the information directly from the individual
concerned.
(2) It is not necessary for an agency to comply with subclause
(1) of this principle if the agency believes, on reasonable
grounds,(a) That the information is publicly available information; or
(b) That the individual concerned authorises collection of the
information from someone else; or
(c) That non· compliance would not prejudice the interests of
the individual concerned; or
(d) That non· compliance is necessary(i) To avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the
law by any public sector agency, including the
prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, and
punishment of offences; or
(ii) For the enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty; or
(iii) For the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) For the conduct of proceedings before any
court or Tribunal (being proceedings that have been
commenced or are reasonably in contemplation); or
(e) That compliance would prejudice the purposes of the
collection; or
(f) That compliance is not reasonably practicable in the
circumstances of the particular case; or
(g) That the information(i) Will not be used in a form in which the
indIvidual concerned is identified; or
(ii) Will be used for statistical or research purposes
and will not be published in a form that could
reasonably be expected to identify the individual
concerned; or
(h) That the collection of the infonnation is in accordance
with an authority granted under section 54 of this
Act.
PRINCIPLE 3
Collection of information .from subject
(1) Where an agency collects personal infonnation directly
from the individual concerned, the agency shall take such steps
(if any) as are, in the circumstances, reasonable to ensure that
the individual concerned is aware of(a) The fact that the infonnation is being collected; and
(b) The purpose for which the infonnation is being collected;
and
(c) The intended recipients of the information; and
(d) The name and address of(i) The agency that is collecting the infonnation;
and
(ii) The agency that will hold the information; and
(e) If the collection of the infonnation is authorised or
required by or under law,(i) The particular law by or under which the
collection of the information is so authorised or
required; and
(ii) Whether or not the supply of the information by
that individual is voluntary or mandatory; and
(f) The consequences (if any) for that individual if all or any
part of the requested infonnation is not provided;
and
(g) The rights of access to, and correction of, personal
infonnation provided by these principles.
(2) The steps referred to in subclause (1) of this principle shall
be taken before the infonnation is collected or, if that is not
practicable, as soon as practicable after the information is
collected.
(3) An agency is not required to take the steps referred to in
subclause (1) of this principle in relation to the collection of
information from an individual if that agency has taken those
steps in relation to the collection, from that individual, of the
same information or infonnation of the same kind, on a recent
previous occasion.
(4) It is not necessary for an agency to comply with subclause
(1) of this principle if the agency believes, on reasonable
grounds,-

(a) That non-compliance is authorised by the individual
concerned; or
(b) That non· compliance would not prejudice the interests of
the individual concerned; or
(c) That non-compliance is necessary(i) To avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the
law by any public sector agency, including the
prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, and
punishment of offences; or
(ii) For the enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty; or
(iii) For the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) For the conduct of proceedings before any
court or Tribunal (being proceedings that have been
commenced or are reasonably in contemplation); or
(d) That compliance would prejudice the purposes of the
collection; or
(e) That compliance is not reasonably practicable in the
circumstances of the particular case; or
(f) That the information(i) Will not be used in a form m which the
individual concerned is identified; or
(ii) Will be used for statistical or research purposes
and will not be published in a form that could
reasonably be expected to identify the individual
concerned.
PRINCIPLE 4
Manner of collection of personal information

Personal information shall not be collected by an agency(a) By unlawful means; or
(b) By means that, in the circumstances of the case,(i) Are unfair; or
(ii) Intrude to an unreasonable extent upon the
personal affairs of the individual concerned.
PRINCIPLE 5
Storage and security of personal information
An agency that holds personal information shall ensure-

(a) That the information is protected, by such security
safeguards as it is reasonable in the circumstances to
take, against(i) Loss; and
(ii) Access, use, modification, or disclosure, except
with the authority of the agency that holds die
information; and
(iii) Other misuse; and
(b) That if it is necessary for the infonnation to be given to a
person in connection with the provision of a service to
the agency, everything reasonably within the power
of the agency is done to prevent unauthorised use or
unauthorised disclosure of the infonnation.
PRINCIPLE 6

Access to personal information
(1) Where an agency holds personal information in such a
way that it can readily be retrieved, the individual concerned
shall be entitled(a) To obtain from the agency confinnation of whether or
not the agency holds such personal infonnation; and
(b) To have access to that infonnation.
(2) Where, in accordance with subclause (1) (b) of this
principle, an individual is given access to personal in(onnation,
the individual shall be advised that, under principle 7, the
individual may request the correction of that infonnation.
(3) The arplication of this principle is subject to the
provisions 0 Parts IV and V of this Act.
PRINCIPLE 7
Correction of personal information
(1) Where an agency holds personal infonnation, the
individual concerned shall be entitfed(a) To request correction of the infonnation; and
(b) To request that there be attached to the infonnation a
statement of the correction sought but not made.
(2) An agency that holds personal infonnation shall, if so
requested by the individual concerned or on its own initiative,
take such steps (if any) to correct that information as are, in the
circumstances, reasonable to ensure that, having regard to the
purposes for which the infonnation may lawfully be used, the
information is accurate, up to date, complete, and not
misleading.
(3) Where an agency that holds personal infonnation is not
willing to correct that information in accordance with a request
by the individual concerned, the agency shall, if so requested
by the individual concerned, take such steps (if any) as are
reasonable in the circumstances to attach to the information, in
such a manner that it will always be read with the information,
any statement provided by that individual of the correction
sought.
(4) Where the agency has taken steps under subclause (2) or
subclause (3) of this principle, the agency shall, if reasonably
practicable, inform each person or body or agency to whom the
personal information has been disclosed of those steps.
(5) Where an agency receives a request made pursuant to
subclause (1) of this principle, the agency shall inform the
individual concerned of the action taken as a result of the
request.
PRINCIPLE 8

Accuracy, etc., if personal information to be checked before use
An agency that holds personal information shall not use that
information without taking such steps (if any) as are, in the
circumstances, reasonable to ensure that, having regard to the
purpose for which the information is proposed to be used, the
information is accurate, up to date, complete, relevant, and not
misleading.
PRINCIPLE 9
Agency not to keep personal information for longer than necessary
An agency that holds personal information shall not keep
that information for longer than is required for the purposes
for which the information may lawfully be used.
PRINCIPLE 10

Limits on use if personal information
An agency that holds personal information that was obtained
in connection with one purpose shall not use the information
for any other purpose unless the agency believes, on reasonable
grounds,(a) That the source of the information is a publicly available
publication; or
(b) That the use of the information for that other purpose is
authorised by the individual concerned; or
(c) That non.compliance is necessary(i) To avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the
law by any public sector agency, including the
prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, and
punishment of offences; or
(ii) For the enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty; or
(iii) For the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) For the conduct of proceedings before any
court or Tribunal (being proceedings that have been
commenced or are reasonably in contemplation); or
(d) That the use of the information for that other purpose is
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to(i) Public health or public safety; or
(ii) The life or health of the individual concerned or
another individual; or
(e) That the purpose for which the information is used is
directly related to the purpose in connection with
which the information was obtained; or
(f) That the information(i) Is used in a form in which the individual
concerned is not identified; or
(ii) Is used for statistical or research purposes and
will not be published in a form that could reasonably
be expected to identify the individual concerned; or
(g) That the use of the information is in accordance with an
authority granted under section 54 of this Act.
PRINCIPLE 11

Limits on disclosure cif personal information

An agency that holds personal information shall not disclose
the information to a person or body or agency unless the
agency believes, on reasonable grounds,(a) That the disclosure of the information is one of the
purposes in connection with which the information
was obtained or is directly related to the purposes in
connection with which the information was obtained;
or
(b) That the source of the information is a publicly available
publication; or
(c) That the disclosure is to the individual concerned; or
(d) That the disclosure is authorised by the individual
concerned; or
(e) That non· compliance is necessary(i) To avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the
law by any public sector agency, including the
prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, and
punishment of offences; or
(ii) For the enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty; or
(iii) For the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) For the conduct of proceedings before any
court or Tribunal (being proceedings that have been
commenced or are reasonably in contemplation); or
(f) That the disclosure of the information is necessary to
prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to(i) Public health or public safety; or
(ii) The life or health of the individual concerned or
another individual; or
(g) That the disclosure of the infonnation is necessary to
facilitate the sale or other disposition of a business as
a going concern; or
(h) That the infonnation(i) Is to be used in a fonn in which the individual
concerned is not identified; or
(ii) Is to be used for statistical or research purposes
and will not be published in a fonn that could
reasonably be expected to identify the individual
concerned; or
(i) That the disclosure of the infonnation is in accordance
with an authority granted under section 54 of this
Act.
PRINCIPLE 12
Unique identifiers

(1) An agency shall not assign a unique identifier to an
individual unless the assignment of that identifier is necessary
to enable the agency to carry out anyone or more of its
functions efficiently.
(2) An agency shall not assign to an individual a unique
identifier that, to that agency's knowledge, has been assigned
to that individual by another agency, unless those 2 agencies
are associated persons within the meaning of section 8 of the
Income Tax Act 1976.
(3) An agency that assigns unique identifiers to individuals
shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that unique identifiers
are assigned only to individuals whose identity is clearly
established.
(4) An agency shall not require an individual to disclose any
unique identifier assigned to that individual unless the
disclosure is for one of the purposes in connection with which
that unique identifier was assigned or for a purpose that is
directly related to one of those purposes.
7. Savings-( 1) Nothing in principle 6 or principle 11
derogates from any provision that is contained in any
enactment and that authorises or requires personal infonnation
to be made available.
(2) Nothing in principle 6 or principle 11 derogates from any
provision that is contained in any other Act of Parliament and
that(a) Imposes a prohibition or restriction in relation to the
availability of personal infonnation; or
(b) Regulates the manner in which personal information may
be obtained or made available.
(3) Nothing in principle 6 or principle 11 derogates from any
provision(a) That is contained in any regulations within the meaning of
the Regulations (DisaD.owance) Act 1989 made by
Order in Council and in force(i) In so far as those principles apply to a
Department, a Minister, an organisation, or a public
sector agency (as defined in paragrarh (b) of the
definition of that term in section 2 (1) 0 this Act) that
is established for the purposes of assisting or advising,
or performing functions connected with, a
Department, a Minister, or an organisation,
immediately before the 1st day of July 1983; and
(ii) In so far as those principles apply to a local
authority or a public sector agency (as so defined)
that is established for the purposes of assisting or
advising, or performing functions connected with, a
local authority, immediately before the 1st day of
March 1988; and
(iii) In so far as those principles apply to any other
agency, immediately before the 1st day of July 1993;
and
(b) That(i) Imposes a prohibition or restriction in relation to
the availability of personal information; or
(ii) Regulates the manner in which personal
information may be obtained or made available.
(4) An action is not a breach of any of principles 1 to 5, 7 to
10, and 12 if that action is authorised or required by or under
law.
(5) Nothing in principle 7 applies in respect of any
information held by the Department of Statistics, where that
information was obtained pursuant to the Statistics Act 1975.
(6) Subject to the provisions of Part VII of this Act, nothing in
any of the information privacy principles shall apply in respect
of a public register.

8. Application of infonnation privacy principles(1) Subject to subsection (4) of this section, principles 1 to 4
apply only in relation to information collected after the
commencement of this section.
(2) Subject to section 9 of this Act, principles 5 to 9 and
principle 11 apply in relation to information held by an agency,
whether the infonnation was obtained before, or is obtained
after, the commencement of this section.
(3) Principle 10 applies only in relation to infonnation
obtained after the commencement of this section.
(4) Nothing in principle 3 shall apply in relation to the
collection, by means of any printed fonn, of any personal
infonnation, if the fonn was printed before the
commencement of this section and is used, before the 1st day
ofJuly 1995, for the purpose of collecting personal infonnation.
(5) Subclauses (1) to (3) of principle 12 apply only in relation
to the assignment of unique identifiers after the
commencement of this section.
(6) Subclause (4) of principle 12 applies to any unique
identifier, whether assigned before or after the commencement
of this section.
9. Postponement of application of principle 11 to lists
used for direct marketing-( 1) Nothing in principle 11 shall
apply, before the 1st day of July 1996, in relation to the
disclosure, by any agency, of personal infonnation collected
before the 1st day of July 1993 for direct marketing purposes,
where that disclosure is made to another agency for the
purpose of enabling that other agency to engage in direct
marketing.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) of this section, "direct
marketing" means(a) The offering of goods or services; or
(b) The advertising of the availability of goods or services; or
(c) The solicitation of donations or contributions for
charitable, cultural, philanthropic, recreational,
political, or other purposes,by means of(d) Infonnation or goods sent to any person by mail,
facsimile transmission, electronic mail, or other
similar means of communication, where the
infonnation or goods are addressed to a specific
person or specific persons by name; or
(e) Telephone calls made to specific persons by name.
10. Application of principles to information held
overseas-(I) For the purposes of principle 5 and principles 8
to 11, infonnation held by an agency includes information that
is held outside New Zealand by that agency, where that
infonnation has been transferred out of New Zealand by that
agency or any other agency.
(2) For the purposes of principles 6 and 7, information held
by an agency includes information held outside New zealand
by that agency.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to render an agency in
breach of any of the information privacy principles in respect
of any action that the agency is required to take by or under
the law of any place outside New Zealand.
11. Enforceability of principles-( 1) The entitlements
conferred on an individual by subclause (1) of principle 6, in so
far as that subclause relates to personal information held by a
public sector agency, are legal rights, and are enforceable
accordingly in a court of law.
(2) Subject to subsection (1) of this section, the information
privacy principles do not confer on any person any legal right
that is enforceable in a court of law.
PART III
PRIVACY COMMISSIONER

12. Privacy Commissioner-( 1) There shall be a
Commissioner called the Privacy Commissioner.
(2) The Commissioner shall be appointed by the Governor·
General on the recommendation of the responsible Minister.
(3) The Commissioner shall be a corporation sole with
perpetual succession and a seal of office, and shall have and
may exercise all the rights, powers, and privileges, and may
incur all the liabilities and obligations, of a natural person of full
age and capacity.
(4) The Commissioner shall be a Crown entity for the
purposes of the Public Finance Act 1989.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s.4
18. Functions of Commissioner-( 1) The functions of the
Commissioner shall be(a) To promote, by education and publicity, an
understanding and acceptance of the information
privacy principles and of the objects of those
principles:
(b) When requested to do so by an agency, to conduct an
audit of personal information maintained by that
agency for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not
the information is maintained according to the
information privacy principles:
(c) To monitor the use of unique identifiers, and to report to
the Prime Minister from time to time on the results of
that monitoring, including any recommendation
relating to the need for, or desirability of taking,
legislative, administrative, or other action to give
protection, or better protection, to the privacy of the
individual:
(d) To maintain, and to publish, in accordance with section
21 of this Act, directories of personal information:
(e) To monitor compliance with the public register privacy
principles, to review those principles from time to
time with particular regard to the Council of Europe
Recommendations on Communication to Third
Parties of Personal Data Held by Public Bodies
(Recommendation R (91) 10), and to report to the
responsible Minister from time to time on the need
for or desirability of amending those principles:
(f) To examine any proposed legislation that makes provision
for(i) The collection of personal information by any
public sector agency; or
(ii) The disclosure of personal information by one
public sector agency to any other public sector
agency,or both; to have particular regard, in the course of
that examination, to the matters set out in section 98
of this Act, in any case where the Commissioner
considers that the information might be used for the
purposes of an information matching programme;
and to report to the responsible Minister the results of
that examination:
(g) For the purpose of promoting the protection of individual
privacy, to undertake educational programmes on the
Commissioner's own behalf or in co-operation with
other persons or authorities acting on behalf of the
Commissioner:
(h) To make public statements in relation to any matter
affectin~ the privacy of the individual or of any class
of indiVIduals:
(i) To receive and invite representations from members of
the public on any matter affecting the privacy of the
individual:
To consult and co-operate with other persons and bodies
concerned with the privacy of the individual:
(k) To make suggestions to any person in relation to any
matter that concerns the need for, or the desirability
of, action by that person in the interests of the
privacy of the individual:
(1) To provide advice (with or without a request) to a Minister
or an agency on any matter relevant to the operation
of this Act:
(m) To inquire generally into any matter, including any
enactment or law, or any practice, or procedure,
whether governmental or non-governmental, or any
technical development, if it appears to the
Commissioner that the privacy of the individual is
being, or may be, infringed thereby:
(n) To undertake research into, and to monitor developments
in, data processing and computer technology to
ensure that any adverse effects of such developments
on the privacy of individuals are minimised, and to
report to the responsible Minister the results of such
research and monitoring:
(0) To examine any proposed legislation (including
subordinate legislation) or proposed policy of the
Government that the Commissioner considers may
affect the privacy of individuals, and to report to the
responsible Minister the results of that examination:
(p) To report (with or without request) to the Prime Minister
from time to time on any matter affecting the privacy
of the individual, including the need for, or
desirability of, taking legislative, administrative, or
other action to give protection or better protection to
the privacy of the individual:
(q) To report to the Prime Minister from time to time on the
desirability of the acceptance, by New Zealand, of
any international instrument relating to the privacy of
the individual:
(r) To report to the Prime Minister on any other matter
relating to privacy that, in the Commissioner's
opinion, should be drawn to the Prime Minister's
attention:
(s) To gather such information as in the Commissioner's
opinion will assist the Commissioner in carrying out
the Commissioner's functions under this Act:
(t) To do anything incidental or conducive to the
performance of any of the preceding functions:
(u) To exercise and perform such other functions, powers,
and duties as are conferred or imposed on the
Commissioner by or under this Act or any other
enactment.
(2) The Commissioner may from time to time, in the public
interest or in the interests of any person or body of persons,
publish reports relating generally to the exercise of the
Commissioner's functions under this Act or to any case or cases
investigated by the Commissioner, whether or not the matters
to be dealt with in any such report have been the subject of a
report to the responsible Minister or the Prime Minister.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 5

14. Commissioner to have regard to certain mattersIn the performance of his or her functions, and the exercise of
his or her powers, under this Act, the Commissioner shall(a) Have due regard for the protection of important human
rights and social interests that compete with privacy,
including the general desirability of a free flow of
information and the recognition of the right of
government and business to achieve their objectives
in an efficient way; and
(b) Take account of international obligations accepted by
New Zealand, including those concerning the
international technology of communications; and
(c) Consider any developing general international guidelines
relevant to the better protection of individual privacy;
and
(d) Have due regard to the information privacy principles
and the public register privacy principles.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 7; Privacy Act 1988 (Aust), s. 29
15. Deputy Commissioner-(I) There may from time to
time be appointed a deputy to the person appointed as the
Commissioner.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall be appointed in the same
manner as the Commissioner, and sections 16 to 19 of this Act
shall apply to the Deputy Commissioner in the same manner as
they apply to the Commissioner.
(3) Subject to the control of the Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioner shall have and may exercise all the powers,
duties, and functions of the Commissioner under this Act or
any other enactment (other than the function of being a
member of the Human Rights Commission).
(4) On the occurrence from any cause of a vacancr in the
office of the Commissioner (whether by reason 0 death,
resignation, or otherwise), and in the case of the absence from
duty of the Commissioner (from whatever cause arising), and so
long as any such vacancy or absence continues, the Deputy
Commissioner shall have and may exercise all the powers,
duties, and functions of the Commissioner.
(5) The fact that the Deputy Commissioner exercises any
power, duty, or function of the Commissioner shall be
conclusive evidence of the Deputy Commissioner's authority to
do so.
(6) Subject to this Act, the Deputy Commissioner shall be
entitled to all the protections, privileges, and immunities of the
Commissioner.
16. Term of office-(I) Except as otherwise provided in
section 18 of this Act, the Commissioner shall hold office for
such term not exceeding 5 years as the Governor-General on
the recommendation of the responsible Minister shall specify in
the instrument appointing the Commissioner.
(2) The Commissioner shall be eligible for reappointment
from time to time.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 9 (1)-(2)
17. Continuation in office after tenn expires-Where
the term for which a person who has been appointed as
Commissioner expires, tnat person, unless sooner vacating or
removed from office under section 18 of this Act, shall continue
to hold office, by virtue of the appointment for the term that
has expired, until(a) That person is reappointed; or
(b) A successor to that person is appointed; or
(c) That person is informed in writing by the responsible
Minister that that person is not to be reappointed and
is not to hold office until a successor is appointed.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 9 (3)
18. Vacation of office-(I) The Commissioner may at any
time be removed from office by the Governor-General for
inability to perform the duties of the office, bankruptcy, neglect
of duty, or misconduct, proved to the satisfaction of the
Governor-General.
(2) The Commissioner may at any time resign his or her
office by notice in writing addressed to the responsible
Minister.
(3) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply where the
Commissioner is a Judge; but nothing in this subsection shall
limit the application of that subsection where the
Commissioner ceases to be a Judge during that person's tenn of
office as the Commissioner.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 11
19. Holding of other offices-( 1) The Commissioner shall
not be capable of being a member of Parliament or of a local
authority, and shall not, without the approval of the responsible
Minister in each particular case, hold any office of trust or
profit or engage in any occupation for reward outside the
duties of the Commissioner's office.
(2) The appointment of a Judge as the Commissioner, or
service by a Judge as the Commissioner, does not affect that
person's tenure of his or her judicial office or his or her rank,
tide, status, precedence, salary, annual or other allowances, or
other rights or privileges as a Judge (including those in relation
to superannuation), and, for all purposes, that person's service
as the Commissioner shall be taken to be service as a Judge.
Cr. 1991, No. 126, ss. 8, 10
20. Powers relating to declaratory judgments-( 1) If at
any time it appears to the Commissioner that it may be
desirable to obtain a declaratory judgment or order of the High
Court in accordance with the Declaratory Judgments Act 1908,
he or she may refer the matter to the Proceedings
Commissioner for the purpose of deciding whether proceedings
under that Act should be instituted.
(2) In respect of any matter referred to the Proceedings
Commissioner under subsection (1) of this section, the
Proceedings Commissioner shall, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in the Declaratory Judgments Act 1908 or any
other enactment or rule of law, have sufficient standing to
institute proceedings under that Act whether or not the matter
is one within his or her own functions and powers under this
Act or under the Human Rights Commission Act 1977.
Cr. 1977, No. 49, s. 5A; 1983, No. 56, s. 3
21. Directories
of personal information-( 1) The
Commissioner may from time to time, as the Commissioner
thinks fit, cause to be published one or more publications that
include all or any of the following infonnation:
(a) The nature of any personal infonnation held by any
agency:
(b) The purpose for which any personal infonnation is held
by any agency:
(c) The classes of individuals about whom personal
infonnation is held by any agency:
(d) The period for which any type of personal information is
held by any agency:
(e) The individuals who are entitled to have access to any
personal information held by any agency, and the
conditions under which they are entitled to have that
access:
(f) The steps that should be taken by any individual wishing
to obtain access to any personal information held by
any agency.
(2) The Commissioner may from time to time bring the
material contained in any publication published pursuant to
subsection (1) of this section up to date, either by causing to be
published a new edition of that publication or by causing to be
published supplementary material.
(3) In detennining whether or not any publication should be
published pursuant to this section, the Commissioner shall have
regard, among other things, to the need to assist members of
the public to obtain personal information and to effectively
exercise their rights under this Act.
(4) Nothing in this section requires the publication of any
information for which good reason for withholding would exist
under section 27 or section 28 of this Act.
22. Commissioner may require agency to supply
information-For the purpose of(a) The publication of any directory or any supplementary
material pursuant to section 21 of this Act; or
(b) Enabling the Commissioner to respond to enquiries from
the public seeking information of the kind referred to
in any of paragraphs (a) to (f) of section 21 (1) of this
Act,the Commissioner may, from time to time, require any agency
to supply to the Commissioner such information as the
Commissioner may reasonably require in relation to the
personal information held by that agency, and the agency shall
comply with that requirement.
28. Privacy officers-It shall be the responsibility of each
agency to ensure that there are, within that agency, one or
more individuals whose responsibilities include(a) The encouragement of compliance, by the agency, with
the information privacy principles:
(b) Dealing with requests made to the agency pursuant to this
Act:
(c) Working with the Commissioner in relation to
investigations conducted pursuant to Part VIII of this
Act in relation to the agency:
(d) Otherwise ensuring compliance by the agency with the
provisions of this Act.
24. Annual report-(I) Without limiting the right of the
Commissioner to report at any other time, but subject to
section 120 of this Act, the Commissioner shall in each year
furnish to the responsible Minister a report with respect to the
operation of this Act during the year to which the report
relates.
(2) The responsible Minister shall lay a copy of the report
before the House of Representatives in accordance with section
44A of the Public Finance Act 1989.
Cr. 1991, No. 126, s. 12
25. Further provisions relating to Commissioner-The
provisions of the First Schedule to this Act shall have effect in
relation to the Commissioner and the Commissioner's affairs.
26. Review of operation of Act-( 1) As soon as practicable
after the expiry of the period of 3 years beginning on the
commencement of this section, and then at intervals of not
more than 5 years, the Commissioner shall(a) Review the operation of this Act since(i) The date of the commencement of this section
(in the case of the first review carried out under this
paragraph); or

(ii) The date of the last review carried out under
this paragraph (in the case of every subsequent
review); and
(b) Consider whether any amendments to this Act are
necessary or desirable; and
(c) Report the Commissioner's findings to the responsible
Minister.
(2) As soon as practicable after receiving a report from the
Commissioner under subsection (1) (c) of this section, the
responsible Minister shall lay a copy of that report before the
House of Representatives.

PART IV
GoOD REASONS FOR REFUSING ACCESS TO PERSONAL
INFORMATION

27. Security, defence, international relations, etc.(1) An agency may refuse to disclose any information requested
pursuant to principle 6 if the disclosure of the information
would be likely(a) To prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or
the international relations of the Government of New
Zealand; or
(b) To prejudice the entrusting of information to the
Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence
by(i) The government of any other country or any
agency of such a government; or
(ii) Any international organisation; or
(c) To prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the
prevention, investigation, and detection of offences,
and the right to a fair trial; or
(d) To endanger the safety of any individual.
(2) An agency may refuse to disclose any information
requested pursuant to principle 6 if the disclosure of the
information would be likely(a) To prejudice the security or defence of(i) The self· governing state of the Cook Islands; or
(ii) The self· governing state of Niue; or
(iii) Tokelau; or
(iv) The Ross Dependency; or
(b) To prejudice relations between any of the Governments
of(i) New Zealand:
(ii) The self.governing state of the Cook Islands:
(iii) The self· governing state of Niue; or
(c) To prejudice the international relations of the
Governments of(i) The self-governing state of the Cook Islands; or
(ii) The self.governing state of Niue.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 27 (1) (a); 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 26 (1) (a)
28. Trade secrets-( 1) Subject to subsection (2) of this
section, an agency may refuse to disclose any information
requested pursuant to principle 6 if the withholding of the
infonnation is necessary to protect infonnation where the
making available of the infonnation(a) Would disclose a trade secret; or
(b) Would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the
commercial position of the person who supplied or
who is the subject of the infonnation.
(2) Infonnation may not be withheld under subsection (1) of
this section if, in the circumstances of the particular case, the
withholding of that infonnation is outweighed by other
considerations which render it desirable, in the public interest,
to make the infonnation available.
C£ 1982, No. 156, s. 27 (1) (a); 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 26 (1) (a)
29. Other reasons for refusal of requests-( 1) An agency
may refuse to disclose any infonnation requested pursuant to
principle 6 if(a) The disclosure of the infonnation would involve the
unwarranted disclosure of the affairs of another
individual or of a deceased individual; or
(b) The disclosure of the infonnation or of infonnation
identifying the person who supplied it, being
evaluative material, would breach an express or
implied promise(i) Which was made to the person who supplied the
infonnation; and
(ii) Which was to the effect that the infonnation or
the identity of the person who supplied it or both
would be held in confidence; or
(c) After consultation undertaken (where practicable) by or
on behalf of the agency with an individual's medical
practitioner, the agency is satisfied that(i) The infonnation relates to that individual; and
(ii) The disclosure of the infonnation (being
intonnation that relates to the physical or mental
health of the individual who requested it) would be
likely to prejudice the physical or mental health of
that individual; or
(d) In the case of an individual under the age of 16, the
disclosure of that infonnation would be contrary to
that individual's interests; or
(e) The disclosure of that infonnation (being infonnation in
respect of an individual who has been convicted of an
offence or is or has been detained in custody) would
be likely to prejudice the safe custody or the
rehabilitation of that individual; or
(f) The disclosure of the information would breach legal
professional privilege; or
(g) In the case of a request made to Radio New Zealand
Limited or Television New Zealand Limited, the
disclosure of the information would be likely to reveal
the source of information of a bona fide news media
journalist and either(i) The information is subject to an obligation of
confidence; or
(ii) The disclosure of the information would be
likely to prejudice the supply of similar information,
or information from the same source; or
(h) The disclosure of the information, being information
contained in material placed in any library or
museum or archive, would breach a condition subject
to which that material was so placed; or
(i) The disclosure of the information would constitute
contempt of Court or of the House of
Representatives; or
(j) The request is frivolous or vexatious, or the information
requested is trivial.
(2) An agency may refuse a request made pursuant to
principle 6 if(a) The information requested is not readily retrievable; or
(b) The information requested does not exist or cannot be
found; or
(c) The information requested is not held by the agency and
the person dealing with the request has no grounds
for believing that the information is either(i) Held by another agency; or
(ii) Connected more closely with the functions or
activities of another agency.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1) (b) of this section, the
term "evaluative material" means evaluative or opinion
material compiled solely(a) For the purpose of determining the suitability, eligibility,
or qualifications of the individual to whom the
material relates(i) For employment or for appointment to office; or
(ii) For promotion in employment or office or for
continuance in employment or office; or
(iii) For removal from employment or office; or
(iv) For the awarding of contracts, awards,
scholarships, honours, or other benefits; or
(b) For the purpose of determining whether any contract,
award, scholarship, honour, or benefit should be
continued, modified, or cancelled; or
(c) For the purpose of deciding whether to insure any
individmu or property or to continue or renew the
insurance of any individual or property.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, ss. 18 (c) (ii), (e), (g), (h), 27 (1) (b)-(h), (2);
1987, No. 8, s. 15 (1); 1987, No. 174, ss. 17 (c) (ii), (e), (g),
(h), 26 (1) (b)-(h), (2)
80. Refusal not pennitted for any other reason-Subject
to sections 7, 31, and 32 of this Act, no reasons other than one
or more of the reasons set out in sections 27 to 29 of this Act
justifies a refusal to disclose any information requested
pursuant to principle 6.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 27 (lA); 1987, No. 8, s. 15 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 26 (2)
81. Restriction
where
person
sentenced
to
imprisonrnent-( 1) Nothing in principle 6 gives any
individual who, after the commencement of this section, is
sentenced to imprisonment for an offence the right to be given
access to any personal information about that individual that is
held by the Police and that relates to the offence for which that
individual was sentenced, or to the conviction or sentencing of
that individual for that offence.
(2) This section shall come into force on a date to be
appointed by the Governor·General by Order in Council.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 24A; 1987, No. 8, s. 14
82.Infonnation concerning existence of certain
infonnation-Where a request made pursuant to princifle 6
relates to information to which section 27 or section 28 0 this
Act applies, or would, if it existed, apply, the agency dealing
with the request may, if it is satisfied that the interest protected
by section 27 or section 28 of this Act would be likely to be
prejudiced by the disclosure of the existence or non· existence
of such information, give notice in writing to the applicant that
it neither confirms nor denies the existence or non· existence of
that information.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 10; 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 8

PART V
PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ACCESS TO AND
CORRECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION

88. Application-This Part of this Act applies to the
following requests (in this Act referred to as information
privacy requests):
(a) A request made pursuant to subclause (1) (a) of principle 6
to obtain confirmation of whether or not an agency
holds personal information:
(b) A request made pursuant to subclause (1) (b) of principle 6
to be given access to personal information:
(c) A request made pursuant to subclause (1) of principle 7
for correction of personal information.
84. Who may make requests-An information privacy
request may be made only by an individual who is(a) A New Zealand citizen; or
(b) A permanent resident of New Zealand; or
(c) An individual who is in New Zealand.
85. Charges-( 1) Subject to section 36 of this Act, a public
sector agency shall not require the payment, by or on behalf of
any individual who wishes to make an information privacy
request, of any charge in respect of(a) The provision of assistance in accordance with section 38
of this Act; or
(b) The making of the request to that agency; or
(c) The transfer of the request to any other agency; or
(cl) The processing of the request, including deciding whether
or not the request is to be granted and, if so, in what
manner; or
(e) The making available of information in compliance, in
whole or in part, with the request; or
(f) In the case of a request made pursuant to subclause (1) of
principle 7,(i) The correction of any information in
compliance, in whole or in part, with the request; or
(ii) The attaching, to any information, of a
statement of any correction sought but not made.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) of this section, an agency that is
not a public sector agency shall not require the payment, by or
on behalf of any individual who wishes to make an information
privacy request, of any charge in respect of(a) The provision of assistance in accordance with section 38
of this Act; or

(b) The making of the request to that agency; or
(c) The transfer of the request to any other agency; or
(d) The processing of the request, including deciding whether
or not the request is to be granted and, if so, in what
manner.
(3) An agency that is not a rublic sector agency may require
the payment, by or on behal of any individual who wishes to
make a request pursuant to subclause (1) (a) or subclause (1) (b)
of principle 6 or pursuant to principle 7, o( a charge in respect
of(a) The making available of information in compliance, in
whole or in part, with the request; or
(b) In the case of a request made pursuant to subclause (1) of
principle 7,(i) The correction of any information in
compliance, in whole or in part, with the request; or
(ii) The attaching, to any information, of a
statement of any correction sought but not made.
(4) Where an agency that is not a public sector agency makes
information available in compliance, in whole or in part, with
an information privacy request, the agency may require the
payment of a charge in respect of the provision of assistance,
by that agency, in accordance with section 38 of this Act, in
respect of that request.
(5) Any charge fixed by an agency pursuant to subsection (3)
or subsection (4) of this section or pursuant to an authority
granted pursuant to section 36 of this Act in respect of an
information privacy request shall be reasonable, and (in the
case of a charge fixed in respect of the making available of
information) regard may be had to the cost of the labour and
materials involved in making information available in
accordance with the request and to any costs incurred pursuant
to a request of the applicant for the request to be treated as
urgent.
(6) The provisions of subsections (3) to (5) of this section, in so
far as they relate to the fixing, by any agency that is not a
public sector agency, of any charge in respect of any
information privacy request, shall apply subject to any
provisions to the contrary in any code of practice issued under
section 46 of this Act and for the time being in force.
er. 1982, No. 156, ss. 15 (lA), (2), 24 (1); 1989, No. 122, s. 2
86. Commissioner may authorise public sector agency
to charge-( 1) Where a public sector agency satisfies the
Commissioner that the agency is commercially disadvantaged,
in comparison with any competitor in the private sector, by
reason that the agency is prevented, by subsection (1) of section
35 of this Act, from imposing a charge in respect of any of the
matters referred to in paragraph (e) or paragraph (f) of that
subsection, the Commissioner may authorise that agency to
impose a charge in respect of either or both of those matters.
(2) The Commissioner may impose in respect of any
authority granted pursuant to subsection (1) of this section such
conditions as the Commissioner thinks fit.
(3) The Commissioner may, at any time, revoke any
authority granted to an agency pursuant to subsection (1) of
this section, but shall not revoke any such authority without
giving the agency an opportunity to be heard.
S7. Urgency-If an individual making an information
privacy request asks that his or her request be treated as
urgent, that individual shall give his or her reasons why the
request should be treated as urgent.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 12 (3); 1987, No. 174, s. 10 (3)
S8. Assistance-It is the duty of every agency to give
reasonable assistance to an individual, who(a) Wishes to make an information privacy request; or
(b) In making such a request, has not made the request in
accordance with the requirements of this Act; or
(c) Has not made his or her request to the appropriate
agency,to make a request in a manner that is in accordance with the
requirements of this Act or to direct his or her request to the
appropriate agency.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 13; 1987, No. 174, s. 11
S9. Transfer of requests-Where(a) An information privacy request is made to an agency or is
transferred to an agency in accordance with this
section; and
(b) The information to which the request relates(i) Is not held by the agency but is believed by the
person dealing with the request to be held by another
agency; or
(ii) Is believed by the person dealing with the
request to be more closely connected with the
functions or activities of another agency,the agency to which the request is made shall promptly, and in
any case not later than 10 working days after the day on which
the request is received, transfer the request to the other agency
and inform the individual making the request accordingly.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 14; 1987, No. 174, ss. 12, 57 (1)
40. Decisions on requests-( 1) Subject to this Act, the
agency to which an information privacy request is made or
transferred in accordance with this Act shall, as soon as
reasonably practicable, and in any case not later than 20
working days after the day on which the request is received by
that agency,(a) Decide whether the request is to be granted and, if it is to
be granted, in what manner and, subject to sections
35 and 36 of this Act, for what charge (if any); and
(b) Give or post to the individual who made the request
notice of the decision on the request.
(2) Where any charge is imposed, the agency may require the
whole or part of the charge to be paid in advance.
(3) Where an information privacy request is made or
transferred to a Department, the decision on that request shall
be made by the chief executive of that Department or an
officer or employee of that Department authorised by that
chief executive, unless that request is transferred in accordance
with section 39 of this Act to another agency.
(4) Nothing in subsection (3) of this section prevents the chief
executive of a Department or any officer or employee of a
Department from consulting a Minister or any other person in
relation to the decision that the chief executive or officer or
employee proposes to make on any information privacy
request made or transferred to the Department in accordance
witb this Act.
C£ 1982, No. 156, s.15; 1987, No. 8, s.8 (1); 1987,
No. 174, ss. 13, 57 (1)
41. Extension of time limits-( 1) Where an information
privacy request is made or transferred to an agency, the agency
may extend the time limit set out in section 39 or section 40 (1)
of this Act in respect of the request if(a) The request is for a large quantity of information or
necessitates a search through a large quantity of
information, and meeting the original time limit
would unreasonably interfere with the operations of
the agency; or
(b) Consultations necessary to make a decision on the request
are such that a proper response to the request cannot
reasonably be made within the original time limit.
(2) Any extension under subsection (1) of this section shall be
for a reasonable period of time having regard to the
circmnstances.
(3) The extension shall be effected by giving or posting notice
of the extension to the individual who made the request within
20 working days after the day on which the request is received.
(4) The notice effecting the extension shall(a) Specify the period of the extension; and
(b) Give the reasons for the extension; and
(c) State that the individual who made the request for the
information has the right, under section 67 of this
Act, to make a complaint to the Commissioner about
the extension; and
(d) Contain such other information as is necessary.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 15A; 1987, No. 8, s.9 (1); 1987,
No. 174, s. 14

42. Documents-(I) Where the information in respect of
which an information privacy request is made by any individual
is comprised in a docmnent, that information may be made
available in one or more of the following ways:
(a) By giving the individual a reasonable opportunity to
inspect the document; or
(b) By providing the individual with a copy of the document;
or
(c) In the case of a document that is an article or thing from
which sounds or visual images are capable of being
reproduced, by making arrangements for the
individual to hear or view those sounds or visual
images; or
(d) In the case of a document by which words are recorded in
a manner in which they are capable of being
reproduced in the form of sound or in which words
are contained in the form of shorthand writing or in
codified form, by providing the individual with a
written transcript of the wor3s recorded or contained
in the document; or
(e) By giving an excerpt or summary of the contents; or
(f) By furnishing oral information about its contents.
(2) Subject to section 43 of this Act, the agency shall make
the information available in the way preferred by the individual
requesting it unless to do so would(a) Impair efficient administration; or
(b) Be contrary to any legal duty of the agency in respect of
the document; or
(c) Prejudice the interests protected by section 27 or section
28 or section 29 of this Act and (in the case of the
interests protected by section 28 of this Act) there is
no countervailing public interest.
(3) Where the information is not provided in the way
preferred by the individual requesting it, the agency shall,
subject to section 32 of this Act, give to that individual(a) The reason for not providing the information in that way;
and
(b) If that individual so requests, the grounds in support of
that reason, unless the giving of those grounds would
itself prejudice the interests protected by section 27
or section 28 or section 29 of this Act and (in the case
of the interests protected by section 28 of this Act)
there is no countervailing public interest.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 16; 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987, s. 174,
s. 15

48. Deletion of infonnation from documents(1) Where the information in respect of which an information
privacy request is made is comprised in a document and there
is good reason for withholding some of the information
contained in that document, the other information in that
document may be made available by making a copy of that
document available with such deletions or alterations as are
necessary.
(2) Where a copy of a document is made available under
subsection (1) of this section, the agency shall, subject to section
32 of this Act, give to the individual(a) The reason for withholding the information; and
(b) If the individual so requests, the grounds in support of
that reason, unless the giving of those grounds would
itself prejudice the interests protected by section 27
or section 28 or section 29 of this Act and (in the case
of the interests protected by section 28 of this Act)
there is no countervailing public interest.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 17; 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 16
44. Reason for refusal to be given-Where an
information privacy request made by an individual is refused,
the agency shall,(a) Subject to section 32 of this Act, give to the individual(i) The reason for its refusal; and
A-26
(ii) If the individual so requests, the grounds in
support of that reason, unless the giving of those
grounds would itself prejudice the interests protected
by section 27 or section 28 or section 29 of this Act
and (in the case of the interests protected by section
28 of this Act) there is no counteIVailing public
interest; and
(b) Give to the individual information concerning the
individual's right, by way of complaint under section
67 of this Act to the Commissioner, to seek an
investigation and review of the refusal.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 19; 1987, No. 8, s. 4 (2); 1987,
No. 174, s. 18
45. Precautions-Where an information privacy request is
made pursuant to subclause (1) (b) of principle 6, the agency(a) Shall not give access to that information unless it is
satisfied concerning the identity of the individual
making the request; and
(b) Shall ensure, by the adoption of appropriate procedures,
that. any information intended for an individual is
recelved(i) Only by that individual; or
(ii) Where the request is made by an agent of the
individual, only by that individual or his or her agent;
and
(c) Shall ensure that, where the request is made by an agent
of the individual, the agent has the written authority
of that individual to obtain the information or is
otherwise properly authorised by that individual to
obtain the information.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 25; 1987, No. 174, s. 24
PART VI
CODES OF PRACTICE AND EXEMPTIONS FROM INFORMATION
PRIVACY PRINCIPLES

Codes of Practice
46. Codes of practice-( 1) The Commissioner may from
time to time issue a code of practice.
(2) A code of practice may(a) Modify the application of anyone or more of the
information privacy principles byA-26"
(i) Prescribing standards that are more stringent or
less stringent than the standards that are prescribed
by any such principle:
(ii) Exempting any action from any such principle,
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as
are prescribed in the code:
(b) Prescribe how anyone or more of the information privacy
principles are to be applied, or are to be complied
with.
(3) A code of practice may apply in relation to anyone or
more of the following:
(a) Any specified information or class or classes of
information:
(b) Any specified agency or class or classes of agencies:
(c) Any specified activity or class or classes of activities:
(d) Any specified industry, profession, or calling or class or
classes of industries, professions, or callings.
(4) A code of practice may also(a) Impose, in relation to any agency that is not a public
sector agency, controls in relation to the comparison
(whether manually or by means of any electronic or
other device) of personal information with other
personal information for the purpose of producing or
verifying information about an identifiable individual:
(b) In relation to charging under section 35 of this Act,(i) Set guidelines to be followed by agencies in
determining charges:
(ii) Prescribe circumstances in which no charge may
be imposed:
(c) Prescribe procedures for dealing with complaints alleging
a breach of the code, but no such provisions may
limit or restrict any provision of Part VIII or Part IX
of this Act:
(d) Provide for the review of the code by the Commissioner:
(e) Provide for the expiry of the code.
(5) A code of practice may not limit or restrict the
circumstances in which an individual is entitled,(a) Under subclause (1) (a) of principle 6, to obtain
confirmation of whether or not a public sector agency
holds personal information; or
(b) Under subclause (1) (b) of principle 6, to have access to
personal information held by a public sector agency;
or
(c) Under principle 7,-
(i) To request the correction of personal
information held by a public sector agency; or
(ii) To request that there be attached to any such
information a statement of any correction sought but
not made.
(6) Notwithstanding the definition of the term "individual" in
section 2 (1) of this Act,(a) For the purposes of the issuing under this section of any
code of practice relating to health information
(whether or not any such code also relates to any
other information), principle 11 shall be read as if it
applies in respect of health information about any
individual, whether living or deceased; and
(b) Any code of practice so issued shall have effect under
section 53 of this Act as if principle 11 so applied, and
the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6) of this section, the term
"health information" has the same meaning as it has in section
22B of the Health Act 1956.
4: 7. Proposal for issuing of code of practice-( 1) Subject
to section 48 of this Act, the Commissioner may issue a code of
practice under section 46 of this Act on the Commissioner's
own initiative or on the application of any person.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1) of this section, but subject
to subsection (3) of this section, any person may apply to the
Commissioner for the issue of a code of practice in the form
submitted by the applicant.
(3) An application may be made pursuant to subsection (2) of
this section only(a) By a body the purpose of which, or one of the purposes of
which, is to represent the interests of any class or
classes of agency, or of any industry, profession, or
calling; and
(b) Where the code of practice sought by the applicant is
intended to apply in respect of the class or classes of
agency, or the industry, profession, or calling, that
the applicant represents, or any activity of any such
class or classes of agency or of any such industry,
profession, or calling.
(4) Where an application is made to the Commissioner
pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the Commissioner
shall give public notice that the application has been received
by the Commissioner, which notice shall contain a statement
that-
(a) The details of the code of practice sought by the
applicant, including a draft of the proposed code,
may be obtained from the Commissioner; and
(b) Submissions on the proposed code may be made in
writing to the Commissioner within such period as is
specified in the notice.
(5) For the purposes of section 48 of this Act, the publication
of a notice under subsection (4) of this section in relation to any
proposed code of practice shall be sufficient compliance with
the requirements of subsection (1) (a) of that section in relation
to the issuing of that code.
48. Notification of intention to issue code-(l) Subject
to section 52 of this Act, the Commissioner shall not issue a
code of practice under section 46 of this Act unless(a) The Commissioner has given public notice of the
Commissioner's intention to issue the code, which
notice shall contain a statement that(i) The details of the proposed code, including a
draft of the proposed code, may be obtained from
the Commissioner; and
(ii) Submissions on the proposed code may be made
in writing to the Commissioner within such period as
is specified in the notice; and
(b) The Commissioner has done everything reasonably pos·
sible on his or her part to advise all persons who will
be affected by the rroposed code, or representatives
of those persons, 0 the proposed terms of the code,
and of the reasons for it, has given such persons or
their representatives a reasonable opportunity to con·
sider the proposed code and to make submissions on
it to the Commissioner, and has considered any such
submissions.
(2) The fact that the Commissioner has published in the
Gazette a notice under section 49 (1) of this Act shall be
conclusive proof that the requirements of this section have
been complied with in respect of the code of practice to which
the notice relates.
(3) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section prevents the
Commissioner from adopting any additional means of
publicising the proposal to issue a code or of consulting with
interested parties in relation to such a proposal.
49. Notification, availability, and commencement of
code-( 1) Where a code of practice is issued under section 46
of this Act,(a) The Commissioner shall ensure that there is published in
the Gazette, as soon as practicable after the code is
issued, a notice(i) Indicating that the code has been issued; and
(ii) Showing a place at which copies of the code are
avci.i1able for inspection free of charge and for
purchase; and
(b) The Commissioner shall ensure that so long as the code
remains in force, copies of the code are available(i) For inspection by members of the public free of
charge; and
(ii) For purchase by members of the public at a
reasonable price.
(2) Every code of practice issued under section 46 of this Act
shall come into force on the 28th day after the date of its
notification in the Gazette or on such later day as may be
specified in the code.
50. Codes deemed to be regulations for purposes of
disallowance-All codes of practice issued under section 46 of
this Act shall be deemed to be regulations for the purposes of
the Regulations (Disallowance) Act 1989, but shall not be
regulations for the purposes of the Acts and Regulations
Publication Act 1989.
51. Amendment and revocation of codes-( 1) The
Commissioner may from time to time issue an amendment or
revocation of a code of practice issued under section 46 of this
Act.
(2) The provisions of sections 47 to 50 of this Act shall apply
in respect of any amendment or revocation of a code of
practice.
52. Urgent issue of code-( 1) If the Commissioner
considers that it is necessary to issue a code of practice under
section 46 of this Act, or to amend or revoke any such code of
practice, and that following the procedure set out in section 48
of this Act would be impracticable because it is necessary to
issue the code or, as the case may be, the amendment or
revocation urgendy, the Commissioner may issue the code of
practice or, as the case may be, the amendment or revocation
without complying with those procedures.
(2) Every code of practice, and every amendment or
revocation of a code of practice, issued in accordance with this
section shall be identified as a temporary code or amendment
or revocation, and shall remain in force for such period (not
exceeding 1 year after the date of its issue) as is specified for
that purpose in the code or, as the case may be, the
amendment or the revocation.
(3) Nothing in section 49 (2) of this Act shall apply in respect
of a code of practice, or any amendment or revocation of a
code of practice, issued in accordance with this section.
53. Effect of code-Where a code of practice issued under
section 46 of this Act is in force,(a) The doing of any action that would otherwise be a breach
of an information privacy principle shall, for the
purposes of Part VIII of this Act, be deemed not to be
a breach of that principle if the action is done in
compliance with the code:
(b) Failure to comply with the code, even though that failure
is not otherwise a breach of any information privacy
principle, shall, for the purposes of Part VIII of this
Act, be deemed to be a breach of an information
privacy principle.
Specific Exemptions

54. Commissioner may authorise collection, use, or
disclosure of personal infonnation-( 1) The Commissioner
may authorise an agency to collect, use, or disclose personal
information, even though that collection, use, or disclosure
would otherwise be in breach of principle 2 or principle 10 or
principle 11, if the Commissioner is satisfied that, in the special
circumstances of the case,(a) The public interest in that collection or, as the case
requires, that use or that disclosure outweighs, to a
substantial degree, any interference with the privacy
of the individual that could result from that collection
or, as the case requires, that use or that disclosure; or
(b) That collection or, as the case requires, that use or that
disclosure involves a clear benefit to the individual
concerned that outweighs any interference with the
privacy of the individual that could result from that
collection or, as the case requires, that use or that
disclosure.
(2) The Commissioner may impose in respect of any
authority granted under subsection (1) of this section such
conditions as the Commissioner thinks fit.
(3) The Commissioner shall not grant an authority under
subsection (1) of this section in respect of the collection, use, or
disclosure or any personal infonnation for any purpose if the
individual concerned has refused to authorise the collection or,
as the case requires, the use or disclosure of the infonnation for
that purpose.

55. Certain personal infonnation excluded-Nothing in
principle 6 or principle 7 applies in respect of(a) Personal infonnation in the course of transmission by
post, telegram, cable, telex, facsimile transmission,
electronic mail, or other similar means of
communication; or
(b) Evidence given or submissions made to(i) A Royal Commission; or
(ii) A commission of inquiry appointed by an Order
in Council made under the Commissions of Inquiry
Act 1908,at any time before the reJ>ort of the Royal
Commission or commission of inquiry has been
published or, in the case of evidence or submissions
given or made in the course of a sitting open to the
public, at any time before the Royal Commission or
commission of inquiry has reported to the Governor·
General; or
(c) Evidence given or submissions made to a commission of
inquiry or board of inquiry or court of inquiry or
committee of inquiry appointed, pursuant to, and not
by, any provision of an Act, to inquire into a specified
matter; or
(d) Infonnation contained in any correspondence or
communication that has taken place between the
office of the Ombudsmen and any agency and that
relates to any investigation conducted by an
Ombudsman under the Ombudsmen Act 1975 or the
Official Infonnation Act 1982 or the Local
Government Official Infonnation and Meetings Act
1987, other than infonnation that came into
existence before the commencement of that
investigation; or
(e) Infonnation contained ill any correspondence or
communication that has taken place between the
office of the Commissioner and any agency and that
relates to any investigation conducted by the
Commissioner under this Act, other than information
that came into existence before the commencement
of that investigation.
66. Personal information relating to domestic affairsNothing in the information privacy principles applies in respect
of(a) The collection of personal information by an agency that
is an individual; or
(b) Personal information that is held by an agency that is an
individual,where that personal information is collected or held by that
individual solely or principally for the purposes of, or in
connection with, that individual's personal, family, or
household affairs.
Cf. Data Protection Act 1984 (U.K.), s. 33 (1)
57. Intelligence organisations-Nothing in principles 1 to
5 or principles 8 to 11 applies in relation to information
collected, obtained, held, used, or disclosed by, or disclosed to,
an intelligence organisation.
PART VII
PuBUC REGISTER PERSONAL INFORMATION

58. Interpretation-In this Part of this Act, unless the
context otherwise requires,"Public register" means(a) Any register, roll, list, or other document
maintained pursuant to a public register provision:
(b) A document specified in Part II of the Second
Schedule to this Act:
"Public register privacy principle" means any of the
principles set out in section 59 of this Act:
"Public register provision" means a provision specified in
the second column of Part I of the Second Schedule to
this Act as a public register provision of an enactment
specified in the first column of that Part of that
Schedule.
59. Public register privacy principles-The
register privacy principles are as follows:
public

PUBLIC REGISTER PRIVACY PRINCIPLES
PRINCIPLE 1
Search references
Personal information shall be made available from a public
register only by search references that are consistent with the
manner in which the register is indexed or organised.
PRINCIPLE 2
Use of information from public registers
Personal information obtained from a public register shall
not be re· sorted, or combined with personal information
obtained from any other public register, for the purpose of
making available for valuable consideration personal
information assembled in a form in which that personal
information could not be obtained directly from the register.
PRINCIPLE 3
Electronic transmission of personal information from register
Personal information in a public register shall not be made
available by means of electronic transmission, unless the
purpose of the transmission is to make the information
available to a member of the public who wishes to search the
register.
PRINCIPLE 4

Charging for access to public register
Personal information shall be made available from a public
register for no charge or for no more than a reasonable charge.
60. Application of information privacy principles and
public register privacy principles to public registers(I) Subject to subsection (3) of this section, the agency
responsible for administering any public register shall, in
administering that register, comply, so far as is reasonably
practicable, with the information privacy principles and the
public register privacy principles.
(2) Every person shall, so far as is reasonably practicable,
comply with principle 2 of the public register privacy principles.
(3) Where any information privacy principle or any public
register privacy principle is inconsistent with any provision of
any enactment, then, for the purposes of this Part of this Act,
that enactment shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, prevail.
61. Complaints
relating
to
compliance
with
principles-(I) The Commissioner may, on complaint made
to the Commissioner by any person or on the Commissioner's
own initiative, inquire into any public register provision if it
appears to the Commissioner that the provision is inconsistent
with any of the information privacy principles or any of the
public register privacy principles.
(2) On completing any inquiry conducted pursuant to
subsection (1) of this section, the Commissioner shall report the
Commissioner's findings to the Minister responsible for the
administration of the enactment that was the subject of the
inquiry, and any such report may include recommendations on
the need for, or desirability of, taking any legislative,
administrative, or other action to ensure adherence or greater
adherence to the information privacy principles or the public
register privacy principles, or both.
(3) The Commissioner may, on complaint made to the
Commissioner by any person or on the Commissioner's own
initiative, investigate(a) The actions of any agency that is responsible for
administering any public register if it appears that the
agency is not, in the administration of that register,
complying with the information privacy principles, or
the public register privacy principles, or both:
(b) The actions of any person if it appears that the person is
not complying with principle 2 of the public register
privacy principles.
(4) On completing any inquiry conducted pursuant to
subsection (3) of this section, the Commissioner shall report the
Commissioner's findings to the chief administrative officer of
the agency whose actions were the subject of the inquiry (or the
person whose actions were the subject of the inquiry, in the
case of an inquiry to which paragraph (b) of that subsection
applies), and any such report may include recommendations on
the need for, or desirability of, taking any administrative or
other action to ensure adherence or greater adherence to the
information privacy principles or the public register privacy
principles, or both.
(5) Sections 68, 70, 71, 73, 75, 80, and Part IX of this Act
shall apply, so far as applicable and with all necessary
modifications, in relation to the making of a complaint
pursuant to this section and to any inquiry conducted by the
Commissioner pursuant to this section.

62. Enforceability of principles-The public register
privacy principles do not confer on any person any legal right
that is enforceable in a court of law.

63. Codes of practice in relation to public registers(1) The Commissioner may from time to time issue, in relation
to any public register, a code of practice.
(2) A code of practice issued under this section may(a) Modify the application, in relation to a public register, of
anyone or more of the public register privacy
principles, or anyone or more of the information
privacy principles, or both, by(i) Prescribing standards that are more stringent or
less stringent than the standards that are prescribed
by any such principle:
(ii) Exempting any action from any such principle,
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as
are prescribed in the code:
(b) Prescribe how anyone or more of the public register
privacy principles, or anyone or more of the
information privacy principles, or both, are to be
applied, or are to be complied with:
(c) Impose requirements that are not prescribed by any
public register privacy principle.
(3) A code of practice issued under this section may also
contain provisions(a) Providing for the review of the code by the Commissioner:
(b) Providing for the expiry of the code.
(4) To the extent that any code of practice issued under this
section is inconsistent with any provision of any enactment, the
code shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be of no effect.
(5) Sections 47 to 52 of this Act, so far as they are applicable
and with all necessary modifications, shall apply with respect to
the issue of any code of practice under this section and with
respect to any code so issued.
64. Effect of code-Where a code of practice issued under
section 63 of this Act is in force,(a) The doing of any action that would otherwise be a breach
of a public register privacy principle or an
information privacy principle shall, for the purposes
of this Part of this Act, be deemed not to be a breach
of that principle if the action is done in compliance
with the code:
(b) Failure to comply with the code, even though that failure
is not otherwise a breach of any public register
privacy principle, shall, for the purposes of this Part
of this Act, be deemed to be a breach of a public
register privacy principle.
65. Power to aDlend Second Schedule by Order in
Council-( 1) The Governor-General may from time to time,
by Order in Council made on the advice of the responsible
Minister given after consultation with the Commissioner,
amend the Second Schedule to this Act by adding any item.
(2) An Order in Council made under this section may add an
item to Part 11 of the Second Schedule to this Act only if the
item relates to a document that contains personal information
and that is held by a public sector agency.
PART VIII
COMPLAINTS

Interpretation

66. Interference with privacy-(I) For the purposes of this
Part of this Act, an action is an interference with the privacy of
an individual if, and only if,(a) In relation to that individual,(i) The action breaches an information privacy
principle; or
(ii) The action breaches a code of practice issued
under section 63 of this Act (which relates to public
registers); or
(iii) The provisions of Part X of this Act (which
relates to information matching) have not been
complied with; and
(b) In the opinion of the Commissioner or, as the case may
be, the Tribunal, the action(i) Has caused, or may cause, loss, detriment,
damage, or injury to that individual; or
(ii) Has adversely affected, or may adversely affect,
the rights, benefits, privileges, obligations, or interests
of that individual; or
(iii) Has resulted in, or may result in, significant
humiliation, significant loss of dignity, or significant
injury to the feelings of that individual.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1) of this section, an action is
an interference with the privacy of an individual if, in relation
to an information privacy request made by the individual,(a) The action consists of a decision made under Part IV or
Part V of this Act in relation to the request,
including(i) A refusal to make information available in
response to the request; or

(ii) A decision by which an agency decides, in
accordance with section 42 or section 43 of this Act,
in what manner or, in accordance with section 40 of
this Act, for what charge the request is to be granted;
or
(iii) A decision by which an agency imposes
conditions on the use, communication, or publication
of information made available pursuant to the
request; or
(iv) A decision by which an agency gives a notice
under section 32 of this Act; or
(v) A decision by which an agency extends any time
limit under section 41 of this Act; or
(vi) A refusal to correct personal information; and
(b) The Commissioner or, as the case may be, the Tribunal is
of the opinion that there is no proper basis for that
decision.
(3) If, in relation to any information privacy request, any
agency fails within the time limit fixed by section 40 (1) of this
Act (or, where that time limit has been extended under this
Act, within that time limit as so extended) to comply with
paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of section 40 (1) of this Act, that
failure shall be deemed, for the purposes of subsection (2) (a) (i)
of this section, to be a refusal to male available the information
to which the request relates.
(4) Undue delay in making information available in response
to an information privacy request for that information shall be
deemed, for the purposes of subsection (2) (a) (i) of this section,
to be a refusal to make that information avciilable.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 28 (1), (2), (4), (5); 1987, No. 8,
s. 16(1); 1987, No. 174, s. 27 (1), (2), (4), (5)

Complaints
67. Complaints-(l) Any person may make a complaint to
the Commissioner alleging that anr action is or appears to be
an interference with the privacy 0 an individual.
(2) A complaint under this Part of this Act may be lodged
with the Commissioner or an Ombudsman.
(3) On receiving a complaint under this Part of this Act, an
Ombudsman shall forward the complaint to the Commissioner
as soon as practicable.
68. Mode of complaint-(l) A complaint to
Commissioner may be made either orally or in writing.
(2) A complaint made orally shall be put in writing as soon as
practicable.
(3) The Commissioner shall give such reasonable assistance as
is necessary in the circumstances to enable an individual, who
wishes to make a complaint to the Commissioner, to put the
complaint in writing.
Investigations by Commissioner
69. Investigation of interference with privacy of
individual-( 1) The functions of the Commissioner under this
Part of this Act shall be(a) To investigate any action that is or appears to be an
interference with the privacy of an individual:
(b) To act as conciliator in relation to any such action:
(c) To take such further action as is contemplated by this Pan
of this Act.
(2) The Commissioner may commence an investigation
under subsection (1) (a) of this section either on complaint made
to the Commissioner or on the Commissioner's own initiative.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 34
70. Action on receipt of complaint-( 1) On receiving a
complaint under this Part of this Act, the Commissioner may(a) Investigate the complaint; or
(b) Decide, in accordance with section 71 of this Act, to take
no action on the complaint.
(2) The Commissioner shall, as soon as practicable, advise the
complainant and the person to whom the complaint relates of
the procedure that the Commissioner proposes to adopt under
subsection (1) of this section.
71. Commissioner may decide to take no action on
complaint-( 1) The Commissioner may in his or her
discretion decide to take no action or, as the case may require,
no further action, on any complaint if, in the Commissioner's
opinion,(a) The length of time that has elapsed between the date
when the subject-matter of the complaint arose and
the date when the complaint was made is such that
an investigation of the complaint is no longer
practicable or desirable; or
(b) The subject-matter of the complaint is trivial; or
(c) The complaint is frivolous or vexatious or is not made in
good faith; or
(d) The individual alleged to be aggrieved does not desire
that action be taken or, as the case may be,
continued; or
(e) The complainant does not have a sufficient personal
interest in the subject-matter of the complaint; or
(f) Where(i) The complaint relates to a matter in respect of
which a code of practice issued under section 46 of
this Act is in force; and
(ii) The code of practice makes provision for a
complaints procedure,the complainant has failed to pursue, or to pursue
fully, an avenue of redress available under that
complaints procedure that it would be reasonable for
the complainant to pursue; or
(g) There is in all the circumstances an adequate remedy or
right of appeal, other than the right to petition the
House of Representatives or to make a complaint to
an Ombudsman, that it would be reasonable for the
individual alleged to be aggrieved to exercise.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) of this section,
the Commissioner may in his or her discretion decide not to
take any further action on a complaint if, in the course of the
investigation of the complaint, it appears to the Commissioner
that, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, any
further action is unnecessary or inappropriate.
(3) In any case where the Commissioner decides to take no
action, or no further action, on a complaint, the Commissioner
shall inform the complainant of that decision and the reasons
for it.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 17; 1977, No. 49, s. 35; 1981, No. 127,
s.3

72. Referral of complaint to Ombudsman-( 1) Where,
on receiving a complaint under this Part of this Act, the
Commissioner considers that the complaint relates, in whole or
in part, to a matter that is more properly within the jurisdiction
of an Ombudsman under the Ombudsmen Act 1975 or the
Official Information Act 1982 or the Local Government Official
Information and Meetings Act 1987, the Commissioner shall
forthwith consult with the Chief Ombudsman in order to
determine the appropriate means of dealing with the
complaint.
(2) As soon as practicable after consulting with the Chief
Ombudsman under subsection (1) of this section, the

Commissioner shall determine whether the complaint should
be dealt with, in whole or in part, under this Act.
(3) If the Commissioner determines that the complaint
should be dealt with, in whole or in part, under the
Ombudsmen Act 1975 or the Official Information Act 1982 or
the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act
1987, the Commissioner shall forthwith refer the complaint or,
as the case requires, the appropriate part of the complaint to
the Chief Ombudsman to be dealt with accordingly, and shall
notify the complainant of the action that has been taken.
Proceedings 0/ Commissioner
78. Proceedings of Commissioner-Before proceeding to
investigate any matter under this Part of this Act, the
Commissioner(a) Shall inform the complainant (if any), the person to whom
the investigation relates, and any individual alleged to
be aggrieved (if not the complainant), of the
Commissioner's intention to make the investigation;
and
(b) Shall inform the person to whom the investigation relates
of(i) The details of the complaint (if any) or, as the
case may be, the subject·matter of the investigation;
and
(ii) The right of that person to submit to the
Commissioner, within a reasonable time, a written
response in relation to the complaint or, as the case
may be, the subject·matter of the investigation.
Cr. 1975, No. 9, s. 18 (1); 1977, No. 49, s. 72 (1)
74:. Settlement of complaints-Where it appears from a
complaint, or any written response made in relation to a
complaint under section 73 (b) (ii) of this Act, that it may be
possible to secure a settlement between any of the parties
concerned and, if appropriate, a satisfactory assurance against
the repetition of any action that is the subject·matter of the
complaint or the doing of further actions of a similar kind by
the person concerned, the Commissioner may, without
investigating the complaint or, as the case may be, investigating
the complaint further, use his or her best endeavours to secure
such a settlement and assurance.

75. Parties to be informed of result of investigation where any investigation is made following a complaint, the
Commissioner shall conduct the investigation with due
expedition and shall infonn the parties concerned, as soon as
reasonably practicable after the conclusion of the investigation
and in such manner as the Commissioner thinks proper, of the
result of the investigation and of what further action (if any) the
Commissioner proposes to take in respect of that complaint.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 36
76. Compulsory conferences-( 1) The Commissioner may
call a conference of the parties to a complaint by(a) Posting to each of them a notice requesting their
attendance at a time and place specified; or
(b) Such other means as is agreed to by the parties
concerned.
(2) The objectives of the conference shall be(a) To identify the matters in issue between the parties; and
(b) To try to obtain agreement between the parties on the
resolution of those matters.
(3) Where a person fails to comply with a request under
subsection (1) of this section to attend a conference, the
Commissioner may issue a summons requiring the person to
attend a conference at a time and place to be specified in the
summons.
(4) Subsections (1), (2), (3), and (5) of section 20 of the
Summary Proceedings Act 1957 shall apply to a summons
under this section as if it were a witness summons issued under
that section.
Cf. 1988, No. 4, ss. 67, 71
77. Procedure
after investigation-(I) Where
the
Commissioner, after making any investigation under this Part
of this Act, is of the opinion,(a) In the case of a complaint, that the complaint has
substance, the Commissioner shall use his or her best
endeavours to secure a settlement between any
parties concerned and, if the Commissioner considers
it appropriate, a satisfactory assurance against the
repetition of any action that was the subject-matter of
the investigation or the doing of further actions of a
similar kind by the person concerned; or
(b) In any other case, that the matter ought to be proceeded
with, the Commissioner shall use his or her best
endeavours to secure such an assurance as is referred
to in paragraph (a) of this subsection.
(2) If,(a) In the circumstances referred to in section 74 of this Act,
the Commissioner is unable to secure such a
settlement and assurance as is referred to in that
section; or
(b) In the circumstances referred to in paragraph (a) or
paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of this section, the
Commissioner is unable to secure such a settlement
and assurance or, as the case may be, such an
assurance as is referred to in either of those
paragraphs; or
(c) In any case to which section 74 of this Act or subsection
(1) of this section applies, it arpears that the action
that was the subject·matter 0 the complaint or, as
the case may be, the investigation was done in
contravention of such an assurance as is referred to in
that section or that subsection, given on a previous
occasion, or that any term of such a settlement as is
referred to in that section or that subsection, reached
on a previous occasion, has not been complied
with,the Commissioner may refer the matter to the Proceedings
Commissioner for the purpose of deciding whether proceedings
under section 82 of this Act should be instituted against the
person against whom the complaint was made or in respect of
whom the investigation was conducted.
(3) Where a matter is referred to the Proceedings
Commissioner under subsection (2) of this section, it shall,
subject to section 82 (3) of this Act, be for the Proceedings
Commissioner to determine, in his or her discretion, both
whether a matter justifies the institution of proceedings under
section 82 of this Act and whether proceedings should be
instituted under section 82 of this Act in respect of that matter.
cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 37; 1983, No. 56, s. 11
78. Procedure
in
relation
to
charging(1) Notwithstanding anything in section 77 of this Act, where
the Commissioner, after making any investigation under this
Part of this Act, is of the opinion that a charge fixed in respect
of an information privacy request is unreasonable, the
Commissioner shall determine the amount of the charge (if
any) that may reasonably be imposed in respect of that request.
(2) A determination of the Commissioner under subsection
(1) of this section shall be final and binding on the person who
made the request and on the agency concerned, and,
notwithstanding anything in section 82 or section 83 of this Act,
no proceedings may be brought before the Tribunal under
either of those sections in respect of any action of any agency
in so far as that action is the subject of a determination made
by the Commissioner under subsection (1) of this section.
79. Breaches of certain principles occurring before
1 July 1996-( 1) This section applies to any interference with
the privacy of an individual involving a breach of any of
principles 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, and 11, in any case where the
action that constitutes the breach occurs before the 1st day of
July 1996.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Part of this Act, but
subject to subsection (3) of this section, where(a) Any complaint is made under this Part of this Act; or
(b) Any investigation is commenced under this Part of this
Act,then, in so far as the complaint or investigation relates to an
interference with the privacy of an individual (being an
interference to which this section applies), the following
provisions shall apply:
(c) Nothing in section 77 (2) or section 77 (3) or sections 82 to
89 of this Act shall apply in relation to the complaint
or the investigation:
(d) The Commissioner may make such recommendations as
the Commissioner thinks fit to the agency against
which the complaint was made or, as the case
requires, in respect of which the investigation was
conducted,
including
(without
limitation)
a
recommendation that the agency develop a code of
practice in relation to all or any of its activities:
(e) Where the Commissioner makes a recommendation to an
agency pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subsection,
the Commissioner may request the agency to notify
the Commissioner, within a specified time, of the
steps (if any) that the agency proposes to take to give
effect to the Commissioner s recommendation.
(3) Nothing in this section applies in relation to any
interference with the privacy of an individual involving a
breach of any information privacy principle, where the action
that breaches the principle constitutes a failure to comply with
a code of practice issued under section 46 of this Act.
80. Commissioner to report breach of duty or
misconduct-If, during or after any investigation, the
Commissioner is of the opinion that there is evidence of any
significant breach of duty or misconduct on the part of any
agency or any officer or employee or member of an agency, the
Commissioner shall refer the matter to the appropriate
authority.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 18 (6); 1982, No. 89, s. 2
Special Procedure Relating to Intelligence Agencies

81. Special
procedure
relating to
intelligence
agencies-( 1) The provisions of this section shall apply in
every case where, after making any investigation under this
Part of this Act in respect of any action of an intelligence
agency, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the action that
was the subject-matter of the investigation is an interference
with the privacy of an individual.
(2) If, in any case to which this section applies, the
Commissioner is of the opinion that any steps should be taken
by the intelligence agency in relation to the subject-matter of
the investigation, the Commissioner shall report his or her
opinion, and the reasons for that opinion, to the intelligence
agency, and may make such recommendations as the
Commissioner thinks fit.
(3) Where the Commissioner makes a report to an
intelligence agency pursuant to subsection (2) of this section,
the Commissioner may request the agency to notify the
Commissioner, within a specified time, of the steps (if any) that
the agency proposes to take to give effect to the
Commissioner's recommendations.
(4) If, within a reasonable time after the report is made, no
action is taken that seems to the Commissioner to be adequate
and appropriate, the Commissioner, in the Commissioner's
discretion, after considering the comments (if any) made by or
on behalf of the agency concerned, may send a copy of the
report and recommendations to the Prime Minister.
(5) As soon as practicable after receiving a report under
subsection (4) of this section, the Prime Minister may lay a copy
of all or any part of the report before the House of
Representatives.
(6) Nothing in section 76 or section 77 or sections 82 to 89 of
this Act shall apply in relation to any complaint made under
this Part of this Act in relation to any action of an intelligence
agency, or in relation to any investigation under this Part of this
Act into any such action.
Proceedings Before Complaints Review Tribunal

82. Proceedings before Complaints Review Tribunal(1) This section applies to any person(a) In respect of whom an investigation has been conducted
under this Part of this Act in relation to any action
alleged to be an interference with the privacy of an
individual; or
(b) In respect of whom a complaint has been made in relation
to any such action, where conciliation under section
74 of this Act has not resulted in a settlement.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) of this section, civil proceedings
before the Complaints Review Tribunal shall lie at the suit of
the Proceedings Commissioner against any person to whom this
section applies in respect of any action of that person that is an
interference with the privacy of an individual.
(3) The Proceedings Commissioner shall not take proceedings
under subsection (2) of this section against any person to whom
this section applies unless the Proceedings Commissioner has
given that person an opportunity to be heard.
(4) The Proceedings Commissioner may, under subsection (2)
of this section, bring proceedings on behalf of a class of
individuals, and may seek on behalf of individuals who belong
to the class any of the remedies described in section 85 of this
Act, where the Proceedings Commissioner considers that a
person to whom this section applies is carrying on a practice
which affects that class and which is an interference with the
privacy of an individual.
(5) Where proceedings are commenced by the Proceedings
Commissioner under subsection (2) of this section, the
aggrieved individual (if any) shall not be an original party to, or,
unless the Tribunal otherwise orders, join or be joined in, any
such proceedings.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 38 (1)-(3); 1983, No. 56, s. 12 (1)
8S. Aggrieved individual may bring proceedings
before Complaints Review Tribunal-Notwithstanding
section 82 (2) of this Act, the aggrieved individual (if any) may
himself or herself bring proceedings before the Complaints
Review Tribunal against a person to whom section 82 of this
Act applies if the aggrieved individual wishes to do so, and(a) The Commissioner or the Proceedings Commissioner is of
the opinion that the complaint does not have
substance or that the matter ought not to be
proceeded with; or
(b) In a case where the Proceedings Commissioner would be
entitled to bring proceedings, the Proceedings
Commissioner(i) Agrees to the aggrieved individual bringing
proceedings; or
(ii) Declines to take proceedings.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 38 (4); 1983, No. 56, s. 12 (2)
84. Remedies that may be sought-In any proceedings
before the Complaints Review Tribunal, the Proceedings
Commissioner or the aggrieved individual (as the case mar be)
may seek such of the remedies described in section 85 0 this
Act as he or she thinks fit.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 38 (5); 1983, No. 56, s. 12 (3)
86. Powers of Complaints Review Tribunal-( 1) If, in
any proceedings under section 82 or section 83 of this Act, the
Tribunal is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that any
action of the defendant is an interference with the privacy of an
individual, it may grant one or more of the following remedies:
(a) A declaration that the action of the defendant is an
interference with the privacy of an individual:
(b) An order restraining the defendant from continuing or
repeating the interference, or from engaging in, or
causing or permitting others to engage in, conduct of
the same kind as that constituting the interference, or
conduct of any similar kind specified in the order:
(c) Damages in accordance with section 88 of this Act:
(d) An order that the defendant perform any acts specified in
the order with a view to remedying the interference,
or redressing any loss or damage suffered by the
aggrieved individual as a result of the interference, or
both:
(e) Such other relief as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(2) In any proceedings under section 82 or section 83 of this
Act, the Tribunal may award such costs against the defendant
as the Tribunal thinks fit, whether or not the Tribunal makes
any other order, or may award costs against the plaintiff, or
may decline to award costs against either party.
(3) Where the Proceedings Commissioner is the plaintiff, any
costs awarded against him or her shall be paid by the Privacy
Commissioner, and the Privacy Commissioner shall not be
entitled to be indemnified by the aggrieved individual (if any).
(4) It shall not be a defence to proceedings under section 82
or section 83 of this Act that the interference was unintentional
or without negligence on the part of the defendant, but the
Tribunal shall take the conduct of the defendant into account in
deciding what, if any, remedy to grant.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 38 (6)-(8); 1983, No. 56, s.12 (4)

86. Right of Proceedings Commissioner to appear in
proceedings-( 1) The Proceedings Commissioner may appear
and be heard, in person or by counsel,(a) In any proceedings under this Part of this Act before the
Complaints Review Tribunal; and
(b) In any proceedings in(i) A District Court; or
(ii) The High Court; or
(iii) The Court of Appeal,in relation to any proceedings that are or have been
before the Complaints Review Tribunal under this
Part of this Act,whether or not the Proceedings Commissioner is or was a party
to the proceedings before the Complaints Review Tribunal.
(2) Where, pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the
Proceedings Commissioner appears in any proceedings of a
kind described in that subsection, he or she shall, unless those
proceedings are by way of appeal, have the right(a) To call evidence on any matter (including evidence in
rebuttal) that should be taken into account in the
proceedings:
(b) To examine, cross-examine, and re-examine witnesses,but shall have no greater rights than parties to the proceedings
in respect of the calling of evidence or evidence in rebuttal, or
in respect of the examination, cross-examination, and reexamination of witnesses.
(3) Where, pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the
Proceedings Commissioner, not being a party to any
proceedings before the Tribunal, appears in those proceedings
or in any proceedings in any court in relation to those
proceedings, the Tribunal or the Court, as the case may be,
may make such order as it thinks fit(a) As to the payment by any party to the proceedings before
the Tribunal or the Court of the costs incurred by the
Proceedings Commissioner in so doing; or
(b) As to the payment by the Proceedings Commissioner of
any costs incurred by any of the parties to the
proceedings before the Tribunal or the Court by
reason of the appearance of the Proceedings
Commissioner.

(4) Costs ordered to be paid by the Proceedings
Commissioner shall be paid by the Privacy Commissioner.
(5) The Privacy Commissioner may appear and be heard in
any proceedings in which the Proceedings Commissioner would
be entitled to appear and be heard under this section but
declines to do so, and, where the Privacy Commissioner so
appears, the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly
with all necessary modifications.
(6) Nothing in this section limits or affects(a) Section 85 (2) of this Act; or
(b) Any power of a court to award costs in any proceedings to
which the Proceedings Commissioner is a party.
C£ 1977, No. 49, s. 38A; 1983, No. 56, s. 13
87. Proof of exceptions-Where, by any provision of the
information privacy principles or of this Act or of a code of
practice issued under section 46 or section 63 of this Act,
conduct is excepted from conduct that is an interference with
the privacy of an individual, the onus of proving the exception
in any proceedings under this Part of this Act lies upon the
defendant.
Cf. 1977,No.49,s.39
88. Damages-(I) In any proceedings under section 82 or
section 83 of this Act, the Tribunal may award damages against
the defendant for an interference with the privacy of an
individual in respect of anyone or more of the following:
(a) Pecuniary loss suffered as a result of, and expenses
reasonably incurred by the aggrieved individual for
the purpose of, the transaction or activity out of
which the interference arose:
(b) Loss of any benefit, whether or not of a monetary kind,
which the aggrieved individual might reasonably have
been expected to obtain but for the interference:
(c) Humiliation, loss of dignity, and injury to the feelings of
the aggrieved individual.
(2) Damages recovered by the Proceedings Commissioner
under this section shall be paid by the Privacy Commissioner to
the aggrieved individual on whose behalf the proceedings were
brought or, if that individual is an unmarried minor or is not of
full mental capacity, in the discretion of the Proceedings
Commissioner to the Public Trustee.
(3) Where money is paid to the Public Trustee under
subsection (2) of this section,-
(a) Section 12 of the Minors' Contracts Act 1969 shall apply
in the case of an unmarried minor; and
(b) Section 66 of the Public Trust Office Act 1957 shall apply
in the case of an individual who is not of full mental
capacity.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s.40; 1983, No. 56, s. 14; 1992, No. 16,
s. 15 (1)
89. Certain provisions of Human Rights Commission
Act 1977 to apply-Sections 41 to 44 and Part IV of the
Human Rights Commission Act 1977 shall apply, with such
modifications as are necessary, in respect of proceedings under
section 82 or section 83 of this Act as if they were proceedings
under section 38 of that Act.
PART IX
PROCEEDINGS OF COMMISSIONER

90. Procedure-( 1) Every investigation under Part VIII of
this Act by the Commissioner shall be conducted in private.
(2) Subject to section 120 of this Act,(a) The Commissioner may hear or obtain information from
such persons as the Commissioner thinks fit:
(b) The Commissioner may make such inquiries as the
Commissioner thinks fit:
(c) It shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to hold any
hearing:
(d) Subject to section 73 (b) of this Act, no person shall be
entitled as of right to be heard by the Commissioner.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commissioner
may regulate his or her procedure in such manner as he or she
thinks fit.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 72
91. Evidence-(I) The Commissioner may summon before
him or her and examine on oath any person who in the
Commissioner's opinion is able to give information relevant to
an investigation being conducted by the Commissioner under
Part VIII of this Act, or an inquiry being carried out by the
Commissioner under section 13 (1) (m) ofthis Act.
(2) The Commissioner may administer an oath to any person
summoned pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
(3) Every examination by the Commissioner under subsection
(1) of this section shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of section 108 of the Crimes Act 1961
(which relates to perjury).
(4) The Commissioner may from time to time, by notice in
writing, require any person who in the Commissioner's opinion
is able to give information relevant to an investigation being
conducted by the Commissioner under Part VIII of this Act, or
an inquiry being carried out by the Commissioner under
section 13 (1) (m) of this Act, to furnish such information, and
to produce such documents or things in the possession or under
the control of that person, as in the opinion of the
Commissioner are relevant to the subject·matter of the
investigation or inquiry.
(5) Where the attendance of any person is required by the
Commissioner under this section, the person shall be entitled to
the same fees, allowances, and expenses as if the person were a
witness in a court and, for the purpose,(a) The provisions of any regulations in that behalf under the
Summary Proceedings Act 1957 shall apply
accordingly; and
(b) The Commissioner shall have the powers of a court under
any such regulations to fix or disallow, in whole or in
part, or to increase, any amounts payable under the
regulations.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 73 (1), (2), (7); 1991, No. 126, ss. 24,
26 (5)
92. Compliance with requirements of Commissioner(1) This section applies in every case where, during the course

of an investigation under Part VIII of this Act of any decision of
any agency in relation to an information privacy request, the
Commissioner, pursuant to any power conferred on the
Commissioner by section 91 of this Act, requires that agency to
furnish or produce to the Commissioner any information or
document or thing which relates to that investigation.
(2) In any case to which this section applies, the agency to
which the requirement is made shall, subject to section 93 of
this Act, as soon as reasonably practicable, and in no case later
than 20 working days after the day on which the requirement is
received by the agency, comply with the requirement.
(3) If any agency (being a Department or a Minister or an
organisation) fails, within the time limit fixed by subsection (2)
of this section (or, where that time limit has been extended
under section 93 of this Act, within that time limit as so
extended), to comply with any requirement to which
subsection (1) of this section applies, the Commissioner may
report such failure to the Prime Minister.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 29A(I), (6); 1987, No. 8, s. 17 (3);
1987, No. 174, s. 29 (1); 1991, No. 126, s. 25 (1), (6)
98. Extension of time Iimit-(I) Where any requirement
to which section 92 of this Act applies is made to any agency,
the agency may extend the time limit set out in subsection (2)
of that section in respect of that requirement if(a) The requirement relates to, or necessitates a search
through, a large quantity of information or a large
number of documents or things, and meeting the
original time limit would unreasonably interfere with
the operations of the agency; or
(b) Consultations necessary before the requirement can be
complied with are such that the requirement cannot
reasonably be complied with within the original time
limit; or
(c) The complexity of the issues raised by the requirement
are such that the requirement cannot reasonably be
complied with within the original time limit.
(2) Any extension under subsection (1) of this section shall be
for a reasonable period of time having regard to the
circumstances.
(3) The extension shall be effected by giving or posting notice
of the extension to the Commissioner within 20 working days
after the day on which the requirement is received.
(4) The notice effecting the extension shall(a) Specify the period of the extension; and
(b) Give the reasons for the extension; and
(c) Contain such other information as is necessary.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s. 29A (2)-(5); 1987, No. 8, s. 17 (3);
1987, No. 174, s. 29 (2)-(5); 1991, No. 126, s. 25 (2)-(4)

94. Protection and privileges of witnesses, etc.(1) Except as provided in section 119 of this Act, every person
shall have the same privileges in relation to the giving of
information to, the answering of questions put by, and the
production of documents and things to, the Commissioner or
any employee of the Commissioner as witnesses have in any
court.
(2) No person shall be liable to prosecution for an offence
against any enactment, other than section 127 of this Act, by
reason of that person's compliance with any requirement of the
Commissioner or any employee of the Commissioner under
section 91 of this Act.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 19 (5), (7); 1977, No. 49, s. 73 (3), (6);
1991, No. 126, s. 26 (1), (4)
95. Disclosures of infonnation, etc.-( 1) Subject to
subsection (2) of this section and to section 94 of this Act, any
person who is bound by the provisions of any enactment to
maintain secrecy in relation to, or not to disclose, any matter
may be required to supply any information to, or answer any
question put by, the Commissioner in relation to that matter, or
to produce to the Commissioner any document or thing
relating to it, notwithstanding that compliance with that
requirement would otherwise be in breach of the obligation of
secrecy or non·disclosure.
(2) Compliance with a requirement of the Commissioner
(being 'a requirement made pursuant to subsection (1) of this
section) is not a breach of the relevant obligation of secrecy or
non· disclosure or of the enactment by which that obligation is
imposed.
(3) Where(a) The Prime Minister certifies that the gIvmg of any
information, or the production of any document or
thing, might prejudice(i) The security or defence of New Zealand, or the
international relations of the Government of New
Zealand; or

(ii) Any interest protected by section 7 of the
Official Information Act 1982 (which relates to the
Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau, and the Ross
Dependency); or
(b) The Attorney·General certifies that the giving of any
information, or the production of any document or
thing,(i) ~ight prejudice the prevention, investigation, or
detectIon of offences; or

(ii) Might involve the disclosure of proceedings of
Cabinet, or any committee of Cabinet, relating to
matters of a secret or confidential nature, and such
disclosure would be injurious to the public interest,-
neither the Commissioner nor any employee of the
Commissioner shall require the information to be given or, as
the case may be, the document or thing to be produced.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, ss. 19 (3), (4), 20 (1); 1977, No. 49, s. 74;
1987, No. 8, s. 24 (1); 1991, No. 126, ss. 26 (2), (3), 27

96. Proceedings privileged-( 1) This section applies to(a) The Commissioner; and
(b) Every person engaged or employed in connection with
the work of the Commissioner.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) of this section,(a) No proceedings, civil or criminal, shall lie against any
person to whom this section applies for anything he
or she may do or report or say in the course of the
exercise or intended exercise of his or her duties
under this Act, unless it is shown that he or she acted
in bad faith:
(b) No person to whom this section applies shall be required
to give evidence in any court, or in any proceedings
of a judicial nature, in respect of anything coming to
his or her knowledge in the exercise of his or her
functions.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) of this section applies in respect
of proceedings for(a) An offence against section 78 or section 78A (1) or section
105 or section 105A or section 105B of the Crimes Act
1961; or
(b) The offence of conspiring to commit an offence against
section 78 or section 78A (1) or section 105 or section
105A or section 105B of the Crimes Act 1961.
(4) Anything said or any information supplied or any
document or thing produced by any person in the course of any
inquiry by or proceedings before the Commissioner under this
Act shall be privileged in the same manner as if the inquiry or
proceedings were proceedings in a court.
(5) For the purposes of clause S of Part 11 of the First
Schedule to the Defamation Act 1992, any report made under
this Act by the Commissioner shall be deemed to be an official
report made by a person holding an inquiry under the
authority of the Parliament of New Zealand.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 26; 1982, No. 164, s.5; 1991, No. 126,
s.29

PART X
INFORMATION MATCHING

Interpretation
97. Interpretation-In this Part of this Act, unless the

context otherwise requires,"Adverse action" means any action that may adversely
affect the rights, benefits, privileges, obligations, or
interests of any specific individual; and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes any
decision(a) To cancel or suspend any monetary payment:
(b) To refuse an application for a monetary
payment:
(c) To alter the rate or amount of a monetary
payment:
(d) To recover an overpayment of a monetary
payment:
(e) To make an assessment of the amount of any
tax, levy, or other charge, or of any contribution, that
is payable by any individual, or to alter any such
assessment:
(f) To investigate the possible commission of an
offence:
"Authorised information matching information" in
relation to any specified agency, means information
that consists of or includes information disclosed
pursuant to an information matching provision:
"Authorised information matching programme" means
the comparison (whether manually or by means of
any electronic or other device) of authorised
information matching information with other
personal information for the purpose of producing or
verifying information about an identifiable individual:
"Discrepancy", in relation to an authorised information
matching programme, means a result of that
programme that warrants the taking of further action
by. anr agency for the purpose of giving effect to the
objectIVe of the programme:
"Information matching programme"
means the
comparison (whether manually or by means of any
electronic or other device) of any document that
contains personal information about 10 or more
individuals with 1 or more other documents that
contain personal information about 10 or more
individuals, for the purpose of producing or verifying
information that may be used for the purpose of
taking adverse action against an identifiable
individual:
"Information matching provision" means any provision
specified in the second column of the Third Schedule
to this Act as an information matching provision of
an enactment specified in the first column of that
Schedule:
"Information matching rules" means the rules for the time
being set out in the Fourth Schedule to this Act:
"Monetary payment" includes(a) A benefit within the meaning of section 3 (1) of
the Social Security Act 1964:
(b) A lump sum payable under section 61DB or
section 61 DC or section 61 DD of that Act:
(c) Any special assistance granted out of the Crown
Bank. Account from money appropriated by
Parliament under section 124 (1) (d) or (da) of that
Act:
(d) Any compensation payable under the Accident
Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Act
1992:
"Specified agency" means any of the following agencies:
(a) The Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation
Insurance Corporation:
(b) The Customs Department:
(c) The Department of Justice:
(d) The Department of Labour:
(e) The Department of Social Welfare:
(f) The Inland Revenue Department:
(g) The Ministry of Education:
(h) The Registrar·General under the Births and
Deaths Registration Act 1951.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s.2
Information Matching Guidelines

98. Information matching guidelines-The following
matters are the matters referred to in section 13 (1) (f) of this
Act to which the Commissioner shall have particular regard, in
examining any proposed legislation that makes provision for
the collection of personal information by any public sector
agency, or the disclosure of personal information by one public
sector agency to any other public sector agency, in any case
where the Commissioner considers that the information might
be used for the purposes of an information matching
programme:
(a) Whether or not the objective of the programme relates to
a matter of significant public importance:
(b) Whether or not the use of the programme to achieve that
objective will result in monetary savings that are both
significant and quantifiable, or in other comparable
benefits to society:
(c) Whether or not the use of an alternative means of
achieving that objective would give either of the
results referred to in paragraph (b) of this section:
(d) Whether or not the public interest in allowing the
programme to proceed outweighs the public interest
in adhering to the information privacy principles that
the programme would otherwise contravene:
(e) Whether or not the programme involves information
matching on a scale that is excessive, having regard
to(i) The number of agencies that will be involved in
the programme; and
(ii) The amount of detail about an individual that
will be matched under the programme:
(f) Whether or not the programme will comply with the
information matching rules.
Authorised Information Matching Programmes
99. Information matching agreements-( 1) No personal
information held by any specified agency shall be disclosed,
pursuant to an information matching provision, to any other
specified agency for the purposes of an authorised information
matching programme except pursuant to a written agreement
between those agencies.
(2) Every such agreement shall incorporate provisions that
reflect the information matching rules, or provisions that are no
less onerous than those rules, and the agencies that are parties
to the agreement shall comply with those provisions.
(3) Any such agreement may provide that the agencies
involved in the information matching programme may charge
each other fees for the services provided for the purposes of the
programme.
(4) The parties to an agreement entered into pursuant to this
section shall ensure that a copy of the agreement, and of any
A-27
amendments subsequently made to such an agreement, are
forwarded to the Commissioner forthwith.
C£ 1991, No. 126, s. 14
100. Use of results of information matching
programme-( 1) Subject to any other enactment or rule of
law that limits or restricts the information that may be taken
into account in taking adverse action against an individual, any
specified agency that is involved in an authorised information
matching programme may take adverse action against an
individual on the basis of any discrepancy produced by that
programme.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section shall be taken to
limit or restrict the use that may lawfully be made, by any
specified agency, of any information produced by an
authorised information matching programme.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 15; Data-matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 (Aust.), s. 10 (1)
101. Further prOVISIOns relating to results of
information matching programme-( 1) Notwithstanding
anything in section 100 of this Act, where(a) A specified agency derives or receives information
produced by an authorised information matching
programme; and
(b) As a result of deriving or receiving that information, the
agency becomes aware of a discrepancy,that agency shall destroy that information not later than the
expiration of the period of 60 working days after the agency
becomes aware of that discrepancy unless, before the
expiration of that period, the agency has considered that
information and made a decision to take adverse action against
any individual on the basis of that discrepancy.
(2) Any adverse action commenced by a specified agency in
accordance with subsection (1) of this section shall be
commenced not later than 12 months from the date on which
the information was derived or received by the agency.
(3) Where a specified agency decides not to take adverse
action against any individual on the basis of information
produced by an authorised information matching programme,
the agency shall as soon as practicable destroy the information.
(4) When information produced by an authorised
information matching programme is no longer needed by a
specified agency for the purposes of taking any adverse action
A-27*
against any individual, the agency shall as soon as practicable
destroy the information.
(5) Nothing in this section applies in relation to the Inland
Revenue Department.
C£ 1991, No. 126, s. 16; Data.matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 (Aust.), s. 10 (2), (3)
102. Extension of time limit-Where a specified agency
derives or receives information produced by an authorised
information matching programme, the Commissioner may,
either generally or in respect of any case or class of cases,
extend the time limit set out in section 101 of this Act in
respect of that information if the Commissioner is satisfied
that,(a) Because of the large quantity of information so derived or
received by the agency; or
(b) Because of the complexity of the issues involved; or
(c) For any other reason,the agency cannot reasonably be required to meet the time
limit.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 17; Data·matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 (Aust.), s. 10 (3)
108. Notice of adverse action proposed-(I) Subject to
subsection (2) of this section, a specified agency shall not take
adverse action against any individual on the basis (whether
wholly or in part) of a discrepancy produced by an authorised
information matching programme(a) Unless that agency has given that individual written
notice(i) Specifying particulars of the discrepancy and of
the adverse action that it proposes to take; and
(ii) Stating that the individual has 5 working days
from the receipt of the notice in which to show cause
why the action should not be taken; and
(b) Until the expiration of those 5 working days.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section prevents an
agency from taking adverse action against an individual if
compliance with the requirements of that subsection would
prejudice any investigation into the commission of an offence
or the possible commission of an offence.
(3) Every notice required to be given to any individual under
subsection (1) of this section may be given by delivering it to
that individual, and may be delivered(a) Personally; or
(b) By leaving it at that individual's usual or last known place
of residence or business or at the address specified by
that individual in any application or other document
received from that individual; or
(c) By posting it in a letter addressed to that individual at that
place of residence or business or at that address.
(4) If any such notice is sent to any individual by post, then in
the absence of proof to the contrary, the notice shall be
deemed to have been delivered to that individual on the fourth
day after the day on which it was posted, and in proving the
delivery it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter was
properly addressed and posted.
er. 1991, No. 126, s. 18; 5 use 552a (p) (3), (4); Data·
matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
(Aust.), s. 11
104. Reporting requirements-(I) Every specified agency
that is involved in an authorised information matching
programme shall make such reports to the Commissioner in
respect of that programme as the Commissioner may from
time to time require.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) of this
section, the matters on which the Commissioner may require
any agency to submit a report include the following:
(a) The actual costs and benefits of an authorised information
matching programme:
(b) Any difficulties experienced in the operation of an
authorised information matching programme, and
how those difficulties are being, or have been,
overcome:
(c) Whether or not internal audits or other forms of
assessment are undertaken by an agency in relation
to an authorised information matching programme,
and, if so, the results of those audits or assessments:
(d) Where an agency dispenses with the giving of notice
under section 103 of this Act, the reasons why such a
dispensation is made, and the grounds in support of
those reasons:
(e) The details of the operation of an authorised information
matching programme, including(i) The number of matches undertaken:
(ii) The proportion of matches that revealed
discrepancies in information involved in the
matching:
(iii) The number of discrepancies so revealed:
(iv) The proportion of cases in which action was
taken as a result of such discrepancies:
(v) The number of cases in which such action was
taken:
(vi) The number of cases in which such action was
taken even though the accuracy of the discrepancy
was challenged:
(vii) The proportion of cases in which such action
did not proceed after the individual concerned was
notified of the discrepancy:
(viii) The number of cases in which action taken as
a result of a discrepancy was successful:
(f) Such other matters as the Commissioner considers
relevant.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s.19; Data·matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 (Aust.), clause 9 of
Schedule

105. Information matching programmes to be
reported on in annual report-(I) The Commissioner shall
include in every annual report of the Commissioner, in relation
to each authorised information matching programme that is
carried out (in whole or in part) during the year to which the
report relates,(a) An outline of the programme; and
(b) An assessment of the extent of the programme's
compliance, during that year, with(i) Sections 99 to 103 of this Act; and
(ii) The information matching rules; and
(c) The details of each extension granted under section 102
of this Act, the reasons why the extension was
granted, and the grounds in support of those reasons;
and
(d) The details of each approval given, during that year,
under clause 3 of the Fourth Schedule to this Act, the
reasons why the approval was given, and the grounds
in support of those reasons.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section requires the
Commissioner to include in any annual report, in respect of any
authorised information matching programme, any information
the disclosure of which would be likely to frustrate the objective
of the programme.
(3) For the purposes of carrying out any assessment required
by subsection (1) (b) of this section, Part IX of this Act shall
apply, with such modifications as are necessary, as if the
assessment were an investigation under Part VIII of this Act.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s.20; Data·matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 (Aust.), clause 10 (1) of
Schedule
106. Review of statutory authorities for information
matching-(I) As soon as practicable after the 1st day of
January 1994, and then at intervals of not more than 5 years,
the Commissioner shall(a) Review the operation of every information matching
provision since(i) The 19th day of December 1991 (in the case of
the first review carried out under this paragraph); or
(ii) The date of the last review carried out under
this paragraph (in the case of every subsequent
review); and
(b) Consider whether or not, ill the Commissioner's
opinion,(i) The authority conferred by the information
matching provision should be continued; and
(ii) Any amendments to the provision are necessary
or desirable; and
(c) Report the Commissioner's findings to the responsible
Minister.
(2) As soon as practicable after receiving a report from the
Commissioner under subsection (1) (c) of this section, the
responsible Minister shall lay a copy of that report before the
House of Representatives.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 21
107. Amendment of information matching rules(1) For the purposes of this Part of this Act, the GovernorGeneral may from time to time, by Order in Council, make
such amendments to the Fourth Schedule to this Act as the
Governor-General thinks fit.
(2) The power conferred by subsection (1) of this section
includes the power to revoke the Fourth Schedule to this Act
and substitute a new Schedule.
(3) No order that amends the Fourth Schedule to this Act
shall be made otherwise than in accordance with the
recommendations of the Commissioner.

Avoidance of Controls on Information Matching
108. Avoidance of controls on infonnation matching
through use of exceptions to infonnation privacy
principles-Where the collection or disclosure of information

is authorised by an information matching provision, nothing in
subclause (2) (d) (i) of principle 2 or paragraph (e) (i) of principle
11 authorises or permits the collection or disclosure of that
information for the purposes of(a) Any authorised information matching programme; or
(b) Any information matching programme the objective of
which is similar in nature to any authorised
information matching programme.
109. Avoidance of controls on infonnation matching
through use
of official infonnation statutesNotwithstanding anything in the Official Information Act 1982
or the Local Government Official Information and Meetings
Act 1987, no public sector agency shall disclose pursuant to
either of those enactments, to any other public sector agency,
any personal information if the sole or principal purpose for
which that information is sought is for use in an information
matching programme.

PART XI
LAw ENFORCEMENT INFORMATION

110. Interpretation-In this Part of this Act, unless the
context otherwise requires,"Accessing agency" means any public sector agency for
the time being specified in the Fifth Schedule to this
Act as an agency to which law enforcement
information held by a holder agency is available:
"Holder agency" means any public sector agency for the
time being specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act
as an agency the records of which are available to an
accessing agency or agencies:
"Law enforcement information" means any information
that(a) Is about an identifiable individual; and
(b) Is specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act:
"Local authority" means a local authority or public body
named or specified in the First Schedule or the
Second Schedule to the Local Government Official
Information and Meetings Act 1987.

Ill. Access by accessing agencies to law enforcement
information-An accessing agency may have access to law
enforcement information held by a holder agency if such access
is authorised by the provisions of the Fifth Schedule to this Act.
112. Local authorities may be authorised to have
access
to
law enforcement information-( 1) The
responsible Minister may from time to time, by notice in the
Gazette, authorise any local authority to have access to law
enforcement information held by a holder agency, where
access to that information by a local authority is permitted by
the provisions of the Fifth Schedule to this Act.
(2) Any authority may be granted under subsection (1) of this
section subject to such terms and conditions as the responsible
Minister thinks fit and specifies in the notice.
(3) Any notice under subsection (1) of this section may be in
like manner amended or revoked at any time.
(4) Any notice given under section 4E of the Wanganui
Computer Centre Act 1976 and in force immediately before
the commencement of this section shall be deemed to have
been given under this section.

Cf. 1976, No. 19, s. 4E; 1989, No. 5, s. 3
llS. Amendment of Fifth Schedule-Before the 1st day
of July 1996, the Governor-General may from time to time, by
Order in Council made on the advice of the responsible
Minister given after consultation with the Privacy
Commissioner,(a) Add, omit, or amend any item in the Fifth Schedule to
this Act; or
(b) Otherwise amend that Schedule; or
(c) Otherwise revoke that Schedule and substitute a new
Schedule.
cf. 1976, No. 19, s. 30; 1989, No. 5, s. 17
114. Expiry of power to amend Fifth Schedule by
Order in Council-Section 113 of this Act shall expire on the
1st day of July 1996, but the expiration of that section shall not
affect the validity of any Order in Council that has been made
under that section and that is in force immediately before that
date.

PART XII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

General
115. Protection against certain actions-(I) Where any
personal information is made available in good faith pursuant
to principle 6,(a) No proceedings, civil or criminal, shall lie against the
Crown or any other person in respect of the making
available of that information, or for any consequences
that follow from the making available of that
information; and
(b) No proceedings, civil or criminal, in respect of any
publication involved in, or resulting from, the making
available of that information shall lie against the
author of the information or any other person by
reason of that author or other person having supplied
the information to an agency.
(2) The making available of, or the giving of access to, any
personal information in consequence of a request made under
principle 6 shall not be taken, for the purposes of the law
relating to defamation or breach of confidence or infringement
of copyright, to constitute an authorisation or approval of the
publication of the document or of its contents by the individual
to whom the information is made available or the access is
given.
Cr. 1982, No. 156, s. 48; 1987, No. 8, s. 21; 1987, No. 174,
s.41
116. Commissioner and staff to maintain secrecy(1) Every person to whom section 96 of this Act applies shall
maintain secrecy in respect of all matters that come to that
person's knowledge in the exercise of that person's functions
under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) ofthis section,
the Commissioner may disclose such matters as in the
Commissioner's opinion ought to be disclosed for the purposes
of giving effect to this Act.
(3) Except where it is necessary to do so for the purposes of
referring a matter to the Proceedings Commissioner pursuant
to section 77 (2) of this Act, the power conferred by subsection
(2) of this section shall not extend to(a) Any matter that might prejudice(i) The security, defence, or international relations
of New Zealand (including New Zealand's relations
with the government of any other country or with
any international organisation); or
(ii) Any interest protected by section 7 of the
Official Information Act 1982; or
(iii) The prevention, investigation, or detection of
offences; or
(b) Any matter that might involve the disclosure of the
deliberations of Cabinet; or
(c) Any information, answer, document, or thing obtained by
the Commissioner by reason only of compliance with
a requirement made pursuant to section 95 (1) of this
Act.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 21 (2), (4), (5); 1987, No. 8, s. 24 (2);
1991, No. 126, s. 30
117. Consultation with Ombudsmen-Notwithstanding
anything in section 116 of this Act, the Commissioner may
from time to time undertake consultation with an Ombudsman
in relation to any matter relating to the functions of the
Commissioner under Part VIII of this Act, including (without
limitation) consultation(a) For the purposes of making a determination under section
72 of this Act:
(b) In relation to any matter arising out of or in the course of
an investigation under Part VIII of this Act:
(c) In relation to any matter relating to privacy, whether or
not the matter arises out of a particular complaint
made under Part VIII of this Act,and, for the purposes of any such consultation, the
Commissioner may disclose to an Ombudsman such
information as the Commissioner considers necessary for that
purpose.
118. Corrupt use of official information-Every person
to whom section 96 of this Act applies shall be deemed for the
purposes of sections 105 and 105A of the Crimes Act 1961 to be
an official.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s.77; 1987, No. 8, s. 25 (1); 1991,
No. 126, s. 31
119. Exclusion of public interest immunity-( 1) Subject
to subsection (2) of this section, the rule of law which authorises
or requires the withholding of any document, or the refusal to
answer any question, on the ground that the disclosure of the
document or the answering of the question would be injurious
to the public interest shall not apply in respect of(a) Any investigation by or proceedings before the
Commissioner or the Tribunal under this Act; or
(b) Any application under section 4 (1) of the Judicature
Amendment Act 1972 for the review of any decision
under this Act;but not so as to give any party any infonnation that he or she
would not, apart from this section, be entitled to.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) of this section affects section 32
of this Act.
Cf. 1982, No. 156, s.l1; 1987, No. 174, s.9; 1991,
No. 126, s. 28
120. Adverse comment-The Commissioner shall not, in
any report or statement made pursuant to this Act, make any
comment that is adverse to any person unless that person has
been given an opportunity to be heard.
Cf. 1977, No. 49, s. 78 (2); 1991, No. 126, s. 32

Delegations
121. Delegation
of functions
or
powers
of
Commissioner-( 1) The Commissioner may from time to
time delegate to any person holding office under the
Commissioner all or any of the Commissioner's functions and
powers under this Act or any other Act.
(2) Every delegation under this section shall be in writing.
(3) No delegation under this section shall include the power
to delegate under this section.
(4) The power of the Commissioner to delegate under this
section does not limit any power of delegation conferred on the
Commissioner by any other Act.
(5) Subject to any general or special directions given or
conditions imposed by the Commissioner, the person to whom
any functions or powers are delegated under this section may
exercise any functions or powers so delegated to that person in
the same manner and with the same effect as if they had been
conferred on that person directly by this section and not by
delegation.
(6) Every person purporting to act pursuant to any delegation
under this section shalf, in the absence of proof to the contrary,
be presumed to be acting in accordance with the tenns of the
delegation.
(7) Any delegation under this section may be made-
(a) To a specified person or to persons of a specified class, or
to the holder or holders for the time being of a
specified office or specified class of offices:
(b) Subject to such restrictions and conditions as the
Commissioner thinks fit:
(c) Either generally or in relation to any particular case or
class of cases.
(8) No such delegation shall affect or prevent the exercise of
any function or power by the Commissioner, nor shall any such
delegation affect the responsibility of the Commissioner for the
actions of any person acting under the delegation.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 28; 1991, No. 126, s. 33 (1)-(8)

122. Delegate to produce evidence of authority-Any
person purporting to exercise any power of the Commissioner
by virtue of a delegation under section 121 o~ this Act shall,
when required to do so, produce evidence of that person's
authority to exercise the power.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 33 (9)
128. Revocation of delegations-( 1) Every delegation
under section 121 of this Act shall be revocable in writing at
will.
(2) Any such delegation, until it is revoked, shall continue in
force according to its tenor, notwithstanding that the
Commissioner by whom it was made may have ceased to hold
office, and shall continue to have effect as if made by the
successor in office of the Commissioner.
Cf. 1991, No. 126, s. 34
124. Delegation of powers by local authority-(I) A
local authority may from time to time, either generally or
particularly, delegate to any officer or employee of the local
authority all or any of the powers of the local authority under
this Act.
(2) Subject to any general or special directions given or
conditions attached by the local authority, the officer or
employee to whom any powers are delegated under this section
may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the
same effect as if they had been conferred on that officer or
employee directly by this section and not by delegation.
(3) Until a delegation made under this section is revoked, it
shall continue in force according to its tenor.
(4) Where a person purports to act pursuant to a delegation
made under this section, that person shall be presumed to be
acting in accordance with the terms of the delegation in the
absence of proof to the contrary.
(5) Any delegation under this section may be made to a
specified officer or employee, or may be made to the holder for
the time being of a specified office.
(6) Every delegation made under this section shall be
revocable at will and no such delegation shall prevent the
exercise of any power by the local authority.
ef. 1974, No. 66, s. 715; 1979, No. 59, s. 2; 1987, No. 174,
s.42

125. Delegation of powers by officers of local
authority-( 1) Any officer or employee of a local authority
may from time to time, by writing under that officer's or
employee's hand, either generally or particularly, delegate to
any other officer or employee of the local authority all or any of
the powers exercisable by the first-mentioned officer or
employee under this Act, except(a) The power to delegate under this section; and
(b) Any power delegated to that officer or employee by a
local authority pursuant to section 124 of this Act,
unless that delegation authorises that officer or
employee to delegate that power to other officers or
employees pursuant to this section.
(2) Subject to any general or special directions given or
conditions attached by the officer or employee making the
delegation, the officer or employee to whom any powers are
delegated under this section may exercise those powers in the
same manner and with the same effect as if they had been
conferred on that officer or employee directly by this section
and not by delegation.
(3) Until a delegation made under this section is revoked, it
shall continue in force according to its tenor; and, in the event
of the officer or employee by whom any such delegation has
been made ceasing to hold office, the delegation shall continue
to have effect as if made by the person for the time being
holding the office of the officer or employee making the
delegation.
(4) Any delegation under this section may be made to a
specified officer or employee, or may be made to the holder for
the time being of any specified office.
(5) Where any officer or employee purports to act pursuant
to a delegation made under this section, that officer or
employee shall be presumed to be acting in accordance with
the terms of the delegation in the absence of proof to the
contrary.
(6) Every delegation made under this section shall be
revocable at will, and no such delegation shall prevent the
exercise of any power by the officer or employee making the
delegation.
Cf. 1974, No. 66, s. 716; 1979, No. 59, s. 2; 1987, No. 174,
s.43
Liability and Offences

126. Liability of employer and principals-(1) Subject to
subsection (4) of this section, anything done or omitted by a
person as the employee of another person shall, for the
purposes of this Act, be treated as done or omitted by that
other person as well as by the first·mentioned person, whether
or not it was done with that other person's knowledge or
approval.
(2) Anything done or omitted by a person as the agent of
another person shall, for the purposes of this Act, be treated as
done or omitted by that other person as well as by the first·
mentioned person, unless it is done or omitted without that
other person's express or implied authority, precedent or
subsequent.
(3) Anything done or omitted by a person as a member of
any agency shall, for the purposes of this Act, be treated as
done or omitted by that agency as well as by the first·
mentioned person, unless it is done or omitted without that
agency's express or implied authority, precedent or
subsequent.
(4) In proceedings under this Act against any person in
respect of an act alleged to have been done by an employee of
that person, it shall be a defence for that person to prove that
he or she or it took such steps as were reasonably practicable to
prevent the employee from doing that act, or from doing as an
employee of that person acts of that description.
C£ 1977, No. 49, s. 33
127. Offences-Every person commits an offence against
this Act and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 who,(a) Without reasonable excuse, obstructs, hinders, or resists
the Commissioner or any other person in the exercise
of their powers under this Act:
(b) Without reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to comply with
any lawful requirement of the Commissioner or any
other person under this Act:
(c) Makes any statement or gives any information to the
Commissioner or any other person exercising powers
under this Act, knowing that the statement or
information is false or misleading:
(d) Represents directly or indirectly that he or she holds any
authority under this Act when he or she does not hold
that authority.
Cf. 1975, No. 9, s. 30; 1991, No. 126, s. 35
Regulations

128. Regulations-The Governor·General may from time
to time, by Order in Council, make regulations for all or any of
the following purposes:
(a) Providing the procedure for the service of notices and
documents under this Act:
(b) Providing for such matters as are contemplated by or
necessary for giving full effect to this Act and for its
due administration.
Amendments, Repeals, and Revocations

129. Amendments, repeals, and revocations-(I) The
enactments specified in the Sixth Schedule to this Act are
hereby amended in the manner indicated in that Schedule.
(2) The enactments specified in the Seventh Schedule to this
Act are hereby repealed.
(3) The orders specified in the Eighth Schedule to this Act are
hereby revoked.
Transitional Provisions and Savings

180. Final report of Wanganui Computer Centre
Privacy Commissioner-( 1) As soon as reasonably
practicable after the 1st day of July 1993, the State Services
Commissioner shall arrange for a final report of the Wanganui
Computer Centre Privacy Commissioner to be sent to the
Minister of State Services showing the Wanganui Computer
Centre Privacy Commissioner's operations for the financial
period ending with the close of the 30th day of June 1993, and
shall attach to the report a copy of the Wanganui Computer
Centre Privacy Commissioner's accounts for that period
certified by the Audit Office.
(2) A copy of the report and accounts shall be laid before the
House of Representatives as soon as practicable after their
receipt by the Minister of State Services.
181. Privacy Commissioner to complete work in
progress of Wanganui Computer Centre Privacy
Commissioner-Where(a) Any request made under section 14 (1) of the Wanganui
Computer Centre Act 1976; or
(b) Any complaint made under section 15 of that Actis pending at the commencement of this section, then,
notwithstanding the repeal of that Act by section 129 (2) of this
Act,(c) The Commissioner may deal with that request or, as the
case requires, that complaint as if the Commissioner
were the Wanganui Computer Centre Privacy
Commissioner under that Act; and
(d) That Act shall continue and be in force for that purpose.
182. Savings-For the avoidance of doubt, and without
limiting the provisions of the Acts Interpretation Act 1924, it is
hereby declared that the repeal, by section 129 (2) of this Act,
of the Wanganui Computer Centre Act 1976 shall not affect(a) The continued existence of the Wanganui Computer
Centre continued by section 3 (1) of that Act; or
(b) The computer system established in connection with that
computer centre; or
(c) Any agreements or arrangements entered into by the
Minister of State Services pursuant to section 3A of
that Act.
183. Transitional
provision-The
person
who,
immediately before the commencement of this section, was
holding office as the Privacy Commissioner under the Privacy
Commissioner Act 1991 shall, without further appointment, be
deemed as from the commencement of this section for all
purposes to have been appointed as the Privacy Commissioner
under this Act, and that person's instrument of appointment
shall be construed accordingly.

SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE

Section 25

PROVISIONS APPLYING IN RESPECT OF COMMISSIONER

1. Employment of experts-(I) The Commissioner may, as and when
the need arises, appoint any person who, in the Commissioner's opinion,
possesses expert knowledge or is otherwise able to assist in connection
with the exercise by the Commissioner of the Commissioner's functions to
make such inquiries or to conduct such research or to make such reports or
to render such other services as may be necessary for the efficient
performance by the Commissioner of the Commissioner's functions.
(2) The Commissioner shall pay persons appointed by the Commissioner
under this clause, for services rendered by them, fees or commission or
both at such rates as the Commissioner thinks fit, and may separately
reimburse them for expenses reasonably incurred in rendering services for
the Commissioner.

2. Staff-(I) Subject to the provisions of this clause, the Commissioner
may appoint such employees (including acting or temporary or casual
employees) as may be necessary for the efficient carrying out of the
Commissioner's functions, powers, and duties under this Act.
(2) The Commissioner, in making an appointment under this clause,
shcill give preference to the person who is best suited to the position.
(3) The number of persons that may be appointed under this clause,
whether generally or in respect of any specified duties or class of duties,
shall from time to time be determined by the responsible Minister.
(4) Subject to subclause (5) of this clause, employees appointed under
this clause shall be employed on such terms and conditions of employment
as the Commissioner from time to time determines.
(5) The Commissioner shall(a) Before entering into a collective employment contract in relation to
all or any of the Commissioner's employees appointed under this
clause, consult with the State Services Commissioner with respect
to the terms and conditions of employment to be included in the
collective employment contract; and
(b) From time to time consult with the State Services Commissioner in
relation to the terms and conditions of employment applying to
those employees appointed under this clause who are not
covered by a collectIve employment contract.
S. Salaries and allowances-(I) There shall be paid to the
Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner(a) A salary at such rate as the Higher Salaries Commission from time to
time determines; and
(b) Such allowances as are from time to time determined by the Higher
Salaries Commission.
(2) Subject to the Higher Salaries Commission Act 1977, any
determination made under subclause (1) of this clause may be made so as
to come into force on a date to be specified for that purpose in the
determination, being the date of the making of the determination, or any
other date, whether before or after the date of the making of the
determination.
(3) Every determination made under subclause (1) of this clause in
respect of which no date is specified as provided in subclause (2) of this
A-28

FIRST SCHEDULE-continued

PROVISIONS APPLYING IN REsPECT OF COMMISSIONER-continued

clause shall come into force on the date of the making of the
determination.
(4) There shall also be raid to the Commissioner and the Deputy
Commissioner, in respect 0 time spent in travelling in the exercise of the
Commissioner's or, as the case may be, the Deputy Commissioner's
functions, travelling allowances and expenses in accordance with the Fees
and Travelling Allowances Act 1951, and the provisions of that Act shall
apply accordingly as if the Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner
were members of a statutory Board and the travelling were in the seIVice
of the statutory Board.
4. Superannuation or retiring aIlowances-(I) For the purpose of
providing superannuation or retiring allowances for the Commissioner, the
Deputy Commissioner, and for any of the employees of the Commissioner,
the Commissioner may, out of the funds of the Commissioner, make
payments to or subsidise any superannuation scheme that is registered
under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, any person who, immediately
before being appointed as the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner
or, as the case may be, becoming an employee of the Commissioner, is a
contributor to the Government Superannuation Fund under Part 11 or Part
IIA of the Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956 shall be deemed to
be, for the purposes of the Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956,
employed in the Government seIVice so long as that person continues to
hold office as the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner or, as the
case may be, to be an employee of the Commissioner; and that Act shall
apply to that person in all respects as if that person's seIVice as the
Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, as such
an employee were Government seIVice.
(3) Subject to the Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956, nothing
in subclause (2) of this clause entitles any such !erson to become a
contributor to the Government Superannuation Fun after that person has
once ceased to be a contributor.
(4) For the purpose of applying the Government Superannuation Fund
Act 1956, in accordance with subclause (2) of this clause, to a person who
holds office as the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner or, as the
case may be, is in the seIVice of the Commissioner as an employee and (in
any such case) is a contributor to the Government Superannuation Fund,
the term "controlling authority", in relation to any such person, means the
Commissioner.
5. Application of certain Acts to Commissioner and staff-No
person shall be deemed to be employed in the seIVice of the Crown for the
purposes of the State Sector Act 1988 or the Government Superannuation
Fund Act 1956 by reason only of that person's appointment as the
Commissioner, or the Deputy Commissioner, or a person appointed under
clause 1 or clause 2 of this Schedule.
6. Services for Commissioner-( 1) The Crown, acting through any
Department, may from time to time, at the request of the Commissioner,
execute any work or enter into any arrangements for the execution or

FIRST SCHEDULE-continued
PROVISIONS ApPLYING IN RESPECT OF COMMISSIONER-continued

provision by the Department for the Commissioner of any work or service,
or for the supply to the Commissioner of any goods, stores, or equipment,
on and subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed.
(2) The Commissioner and the Human Rights Commission may from
time to time enter into any arrangements for the provision, by the
Commission to the Commissioner, of office accommodation and other
services, on and subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed.
7. Funds of Commissioner-The funds of the Commissioner shall
consist of(a) Any money appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the
Commissioner and paid to the Commissioner for the purposes of
the Commissioner:
(b) All other money lawfully received by the Commissioner for the
purposes of the Commissioner:
(c) All accumulations of income derived from any such money.
8. Bank accounts-( 1) The Commissioner shall open at any bank or
banks such accounts as are necessary for the exercise of the
Commissioner's functions and powers.
(2) All money received by the Commissioner, or the Deputy
Commissioner, or by any employee of the Commissioner, shall, as soon as
practicable after it has been received, be paid into such bank accounts of
the Commissioner as the Commissioner from time to time determines.
(3) The withdrawal or payment of money from any such account shall
be authorised in such manner as the Commissioner thinks fit.
9. Investment of money-Any money that belongs to the
Commissioner and that is not immediately required for expenditure by the
Commissioner may be invested pursuant to section 25 of the Public
Finance Act 1989.
10. Commissioner not to borrow without consent of Minister of
Finance-Notwithstanding anything in section 12 (3) of this Act, the
Commissioner shall not borrow or contract to borrow any money, or
renew any loan made to the Commissioner, without the prior written
consent of the Minister of Finance.
11. Seal-The Commissioner's seal of office shall be judicially noticed in
all courts and for all purposes.
12. Exemption from income tax-The income of the Commissioner
shall be exempt from income tax.

820
SECOND SCHEDULE

Sections 58, 65

PUBUC REGISTERS
PART I

Public Register Prwisions
Enactment

Deeds Registration Act 1908
Industrial and Provident Societies
Act 1908
Incorporated Societies Act 1908
Valuation of Land Act 1951
Births and Deaths Registration Act
1951
Industrial and Provident Societies
Amendment Act 1952
Land Transfer Act 1952
Companies Act 1955
Marriage Act 1955
Electoral Act 1956
Insolvency Act 1967
..
..
Local Elections and Polls Act 1976
Dog Control and Hydatids Act 1982
Friendly Societies and Credit
Unions Act 1982
Transport (Vehicle and Driver
Registration and Ucensing) Act
1986
Rating Powers Act 1988
..
Motor Vehicle Securities Act 1989
Building Act 1991

Public Register Provision

Sections 21, 22, and 30
Section 3D
Section 33
Section 8
Sections 7, 14 (2), and 36
Sections 20 and 26
Sections 33 and 50
Sections 7, 105, Ill, 118, 119, 128,
and 200
Sections 7, 35, 38, 43 (2), and 46
Sections 59, 60, 60B, 60c, 61, 62, 63,
63A, 65A, 65AB, 138, and 138A
Section 118
Sections 7B, 7BA, 7BB, 7BC, and 7BD
Section 35
Sections 5, 40, and 130
Sections 18 and 45
Section 113
Section 5
Sections 27 and 53

PART 11
Documents Deemed to be Public Registers
Documents held by local authorities and containing authorities for the
carrying out of any work for or in connection witb the construction,
alteration, demolition, or removal of a building, where the authority was
g:r:anted under any bylaw made under the authority of section 684 (1) (22)
of the Local Government Act 1974 or any equivalent provision of any
former enactment.

Privacy
THIRD SCHEDULE

Section 97

INFORMATION MATCHING PROVISIONS

Enactment

Births and Deaths Registration Act

Information Matching Provision

Sections 39B and 41A

1951

Penal Institutions Act 1954
Marriage Act 1955
Customs Act 1966
Inland Revenue Department Act

Section 36F
Sections 49A and 50A
Section 305B
Sections 13A and 13B

1974

Immigration Act 1987
Education Act 1989
Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Act 1992

Section 141A
Section 307A
Sections 164 and 165

822
Sections 97, 99, 107

FOURTH SCHEDULE
INFORMATION MATCHING RULES

1. Notice to individuals affected-(I) Agencies involved in an
authorised information matching programme shall take all reasonable
steps (which may consist of or include public notification) to ensure that
the individuals who will be affected by the programme are notified of the
programme.
(2) Nothing in subclause (I) of this clause requires an agency to notify
any individual about an authorised information matching programme if to
do so would be likely to frustrate the objective of the programme.

2. Use of unique identifiers-Except as provided in any other
enactment, unique identifiers shall not be used as part of any authorised
information matching programme unless their use is essential to the
success of the programme.
S. On-line transfers-(I) Except with the approval of the
Commissioner, information transferred between agencies for the purposes
of an authorised information matching programme shall not be
transferred by means of on·line computer connections.
(2) Any approval given under subclause (I) of this clause may be given
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as the Commissioner
thinks fit.
(3) Any approval given under subclause (I) of this clause may at any time
be withdrawn by the Commissioner; and any condition subject to which
any such approval is given may from time to time be revoked, varied, or
added to by the Commissioner.

4. Technical standards-(I) The agency primarily responsible for the
operation of an authorised information matching programme shall
establish and maintain detailed technical standards to govern the
operation of the programme.
(2) The technical standards established by an agency in accordance with
subclause (I) of this clause shall deal with the following matters:
(a) The integrity of the information to be matched, with particular
reference to(i) Key terms and their definition; and
(ii) Relevance, timeliness, and completeness:
(b) The matching techniques to be used in the programme, with
particular reference to(i) The matching algorithm:
(ii) Any use of unique identifiers:
(iii) The nature of the matters being sought to be identified by
the matching process:
(iv) The relevant information definitions:
(v) The procedure for recognising matches:
(c) The controls being used to ensure the continued integrity of the
programme, including the procedures that have been established
to confirm the validity of matching results:
(d) The security features included within the programme to minimise
and audit access to personal information, including the means by
which the informauon is to be transferred between agencies.
(3) The technical standards established in accordance with subclause (I)
of this clause shall be incorporated in a written document (in this clause

FOURTH SCHEDULE-continued
INFORMATION MATCHING RULEs-continued
called a Technical Standards Report), and copies of the Technical
Standards Report shall be held by all agencies that are involved in the
authorised infonnation matching programme.
(4) Variations may be made to a Technical Standards Report by way of a
Variation Report appended to the original Report.
(5) The agency that prepares a Technical Standards Report shall forward
a copy of that report, and of every Variation Report appended to that
report, to the Commissioner.
(6) The Commissioner may from time to time direct that a Technical
Standards Report be varied, and every such direction shall be complied
with by the agency that prepared the Report.
(7) Every agency involved in an authorised infonnation matching
programme shall comply with the requirements of the associated
Technical Standards Report (including any variations made to the report).

5. Safeguards for individuals affected by results of programmes(1) The agencies involved in an authorised infonnation matching
programme shall establish reasonable procedures for confirming the
validity of discrepancies before any agency seeks to rely on them as a basis
for action in respect of an individual.
(2) Subclause (1) of this clause shall not apply if the agencies concerned
consider that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the results are
not likely to be in error, and in forming such a view regard shall be had to
the consistency in content and context of the infonnation being matched.
(3) Where such confinnation procedures do not take the fonn of
checking the results against the source infonnation, but instead involve
direct communication with the individual affected, the agency that seeks to
rely on the discrepancy as a basis for action in respect of an individual shall
notify the individual affected that no check has been made against the
infonnation which fonned the basis for the infonnation supplied for the
programme.
(4) Every notification in accordance with subclause (3) ofthis clause shall
include an explanation of the procedures that are involved in the
examination of a discrepancy revealed by the programme.
6. Destruction of infonnation-( 1) Personal infonnation that is
disclosed, pursuant to an infonnation matching provision, to an agency for
use in an authorised infonnation matching programme and that does not
reveal a discrepancy shall be destroyed as soon as practicable by that
agency.
(2) Where(a) Personal infonnation is disclosed, pursuant to an information
matching provision, to an agency for use in an authorised
infonnation matching programme; and
(b) That infonnation reveals a discrepancy,that infonnation shall be destroyed by that agency as soon as practicable
after that infonnation is no longer needed by that agency for the purposes
of taking any adverse action against any individual.
(3) Nothing in this clause applies in relation to the Inland Revenue
Department.

FOURTH SCHEDULE-continued
INFORMATION MATCHING RULES-continued

7. No new databank-(I) Subject to subclauses (2) and (3) of this clause,
the agencies involved in an authorised information matching programme
shall not permit the information used in the programme to be linked or
merged in such a way that a new separate permanent register or databank
of information is created about all or any of the individuals whose
information has been subject to the programme.
(2) Subclause (1) of this clause does not prevent an agency from
maintaining a register of individuals in respect of whom further inquiries
are warranted following a discrepancy revealed by the programme, but
information relating to an individual may be maintained on such a register
only for so long as is necessary to enable those inquiries to be carried out,
and in no case longer than is necessary to enable any adverse action to be
taken against an individual.
(3) Subclause (1) of this clause does not prevent an agency from
maintaining a register for the purpose of excluding individuals from being
selected for investigation, but such register shall contain the minimum
amount of information necessary for that purpose.
8. Time limits-( 1) Where an authorised information matching
programme is to continue for any period longer than 1 year, or for an
indefinite period, the agencies involved in the programme shall establish
limits on the number of times that matching is carried out pursuant to the
programme in each year of its operation.
(2) The limits established in accordance with subcIause (1) of this clause
shiIf be stated in writing in an annex to the Technical Standards Report
prepared in respect of the programme pursuant to clause 4 of this
Schedule.
(3) The limits established in accordance with subclause (1) of this clause
may be varied from time to time by the agencies involved in the
programme.

FIFTH SCHEDULE

Sections lll, 113

LAw ENFORCEMENT INFORMATION

Department ofJustice Records
Subject

Community-based sentences
conditions of release
Court document processing
Details of hearings

and

Description

Access Available To

Particulars of persons released on probation or parole, or
released on conditions under Part VI of the Criminal
Justice Act 1985, or sentenced to community service,
periodic detention, supervision, or community care
Particulars of proceedings in respect of which infonnations
are to be laid; the acceptance of data for and the
preparation of associated documents
Details of hearings of proceedings in respect of which an
infonnation has been laid, including all matters ancillary
and subsequent to a determination

Police (access is limited to
the person's area of
reporting)
Police
Serious Fraud Office
Police (access is limited so
as to exclude details
relating
to
young
persons, being persons
over the age of 14
years but under the age
of 17 years, where the
offence did not carry a
liability to imprisonment)
Transport
(access
is
limited to traffic cases
only)
Serious
Fraud
Office
(access is limited so as
to
exclude
details
relating
to
young
persons, being persons
over the age of 14
years but under the age
of 17 years, where the
offence did not carry a
liability to imprisonment)

FIFTH SCHEDULE-continued

N)

0'1

LAw ENFORCEMENT INFORMATION-continued

Department rif Justice Records-continued
Subject

Enforcement of fines
orders

Records of inmates

Description

and other

Particulars of writs, warrants, or orders in force and issued
or made on default in the payment of fines or other
monetary sums ordered in proceedings commenced by
indictment or information; particulars of the persons to
whom the writs, warrants, or orders relate; and
particulars of fines, sentences, or orders imposed or made
against those persons, including the amounts remaining
payable thereunder and the arrangements for payment
Particulars of inmates of penal institutions including the
date of release there from

Access Available To

Police

Police (access is limited to
the location and the
date of release of the
inmate)

FIFTH SCHEDULE-continued
LAw ENFORCEMENT INFORMATION-continued
Police Records
Subject

Description

Details of hearings

Details of overseas convictions

Finger prints and identity

Classification of finger prints and particulars of the identity
of persons who have been charged with an offence

Medical details

An indicator to identifY persons who are or have been
special patients under the Mental Health (Compulsory
Assessment and Treatment) Act 1992 or any former Act
and the hospitals at which those persons are or have been
detained as special patients, or as committed patients, or
as patients (within the meaning of that Act)
Traffic offence and infringement enforcement processing,
including infringement fees enforcement and preparation
of documents in relation to offences not otherwise
provided for by the Department of justice

Traffic offence
enforcement
processing

and infringement
and
document

Access Available To

justice
Serious Fraud Office
justice (access is limited
to identity details for
the purpose of entering
information relating to
prosecutions initiated
otherwise than by the
Police or the Ministry
of Transport)
Transport
justice