Unofficial Translation

Personal Data Protection Law
Chapter I
General Provisions
Section 1.
The purpose of this Law is to protect the fundamental human rights and freedoms
of natural persons, in particular the inviolability of private life, with respect to the
processing of data regarding natural persons (hereinafter — personal data).
Section 2.
The following terms are used in this Law:
1) data subject — a natural person who may be directly or indirectly identified
using data available within a data processing system;
2) consent of a data subject — a freely, unmistakably expressed affirmation of
the wishes of a data subject, by which the data subject allows his or her personal
data to be processed;
3) personal data — any information related to an identified or identifiable
natural person;
4) personal data processing — any operations carried out regarding personal
data, including data collection, registration, recording, storing, arrangement,
transformation, utilisation, transfer, transmission and dissemination, blockage or
erasure;
5) personal data processing system — a structured body of personal data
recorded in any form that is accessible on the basis of relevant criteria;
6) processor of personal data — a person authorised by a system controller,
who carries out personal data processing upon the instructions of the system
controller;
7) recipient of personal data — a natural or a legal person to whom personal
data are disclosed;
8) sensitive personal data - personal data which indicate the race, ethnic
origin, religious, philosophical or political convictions, or trade union membership
of a person, or provide information as to the health or sexual life of a person;
9) system controller — a natural or a legal person who manages a personal
data processing system and determines its purposes and the means of
processing;
10) third person — any natural or legal person except for a data subject, a
system controller, a system processor and persons who have been directly
authorised by a system controller or a processor of personal data.
Section 3.
(1) This Law applies to the processing of all types of personal data, and to any
natural and legal person involved in personal data processing, except in the cases
set out in Paragraphs two and three of this Section.
(2) This Law does not apply to the information systems made by natural persons
in which personal data are processed for personal or household and family
purposes and in which the personal data collected are not disclosed to other
persons.
(3) This Law does not apply to the processing of personal data carried out by
public institutions in the fields of national security and criminal law.
Section 4.
The protection of personal data which have been declared to be official secret
matters shall be regulated by the Law on Official Secrets.
Section 5.
(1) Sections 7, 8, 9 and 11 of this Law shall not apply if personal data are
processed for journalistic, artistic or literary purposes, and it is not prescribed
otherwise by law.
(2) In applying the provisions of Paragraph one of this Section, regard shall be
had to the rights of persons to inviolability of private life and freedom of
expression.

Chapter II
General Principles for Personal Data Processing
Section 6.
Every natural person has the right to protection of his or her personal data.
Section 7.
Personal data processing is permitted only if not prescribed otherwise by law, and
at least one of the following conditions exist:
1) the data subject has given his or her consent;
2) the personal data processing results from contractual obligations of the data
subject;
3) the data processing is necessary to a system controller for the performance of
his or her lawful obligations;
4) the data processing is necessary to protect vitally important interests of the
data subject, including life and health;
5) the data processing is necessary in order to ensure that the public interest is
complied with, or to fulfil functions of public authority for whose performance the
personal data have been transferred to a system controller or transmitted to a
third person; and
6) the data processing is necessary in order to, complying with the fundamental
human rights and freedoms of the data subject, exercise lawful interests of the
system controller or of such third person as the personal data have been
disclosed to.
Section 8.
(1) When collecting personal data from a data subject, a system controller has an
obligation to provide a data subject with the following information unless it is
already available to the data subject:
1) the designation, or name and surname, and address of the system controller;
2) the intended purpose and basis for the personal data processing;
3) the possible recipients of the personal data;
4) the rights of the data subject to gain access to his or her personal data and the
possibility of rectifying such data; and
5) whether providing an answer is mandatory or voluntary, as well as possible
consequences of failing to provide an answer.
(2) Paragraph one of this Section is not applicable, if the conducting of personal
data processing without disclosing its purpose is authorised by law.
Section 9.
(1) If personal data have not been obtained from the data subject, a system
controller, prior to disclosing the data to third persons, is obliged to provide the
data subject with the following information:
1) the designation, or name and surname, and address of the system controller;
2) the intended purpose for the personal data processing;
3) the possible recipients of the personal data;
4) the source of the personal data; and
5) the rights of data subjects to gain access to his or her personal data and the
possibility of rectifying such data.
(2) Paragraph one of this Section is not applicable, if:
1) the law provides for the processing of personal data without informing the data
subject thereof; and
2) when processing personal data for scientific, historical or statistical research,
the informing of the data subject requires inordinate effort or is impossible.
Section 10.
(1) In order to protect the interests of a data subject, a system controller shall
ensure that:
1) the personal data processing takes place lawfully;
2) the personal data are collected in accordance with the intended purpose and to
the extent required therefor;
3) the personal data are stored so that the data subject is identifiable during a
relevant period of time, which does not exceed the time period prescribed for the
intended purpose of the data processing; and
4) the personal data are accurate and that they are updated, rectified or erased
in a timely manner if such personal data are incomplete or inaccurate.
(2) Personal data processing for purposes other than those originally intended is
permissible if it does not violate the rights of the data subject and is carried out
for the needs of scientific or statistical research only in accordance with the
conditions mentioned in Section 9 and Section 10, Paragraph one of this Law.
Section 11.
The processing of sensitive personal data is prohibited, except in cases where:
1) the data subject has given his or her written consent for the processing of his
or her sensitive personal data;
2) special processing of personal data, without requesting the consent of the data
subject, is provided for by regulatory enactments which regulate legal relations
regarding employment, and such regulatory enactments guarantee the protection
of personal data;
3) personal data processing is necessary to protect the life and health of the data
subject or another person, and the data subject is not legally or physically able to
express his or her consent;
4) personal data processing is necessary to achieve the lawful, non-commercial
objectives of public organisations and their associations, if such data processing is
only related to the members of these organisations or their associations and the
personal data are not transferred to third parties;
5) personal data processing is necessary for the purposes of medical treatment, is
carried out by a medical practitioner or a medical treatment institution and an
adequate level of protection of personal data is ensured; or
6) the processing concerns such personal data as necessary for the protection of
lawful rights and interests of natural or legal persons in court proceedings.
Section 12.
If personal data relate to disciplinary and administrative violations or judgments
in civil matters, only officials authorised by State or local government institutions
are entitled to process such data.
Section 13.
(1) A system controller is obliged to disclose personal data in cases provided for
by law to officials of State and local government institutions. The system
controller shall disclose the personal data only to such officials of the State and
local government institutions as he or she has identified prior to the disclosure of
such data.
(2) Personal data may be disclosed on the basis of a written application or
agreement, stating the purpose for using the data, if not prescribed otherwise by
law. The application for personal data shall set out information as will allow
identification of the applicant for the data and the data subject, as well as the
scope of the personal data requested.
(3) The personal data received may be used only for the purposes for which they
are intended.
Section 14.
(1) A system controller may entrust personal data processing to a personal data
processor provided a written contract is entered into between them.
(2) A personal data processor may process personal data entrusted to him or her
only within the scope determined in the contract and in accordance with the
purposes provided for therein.
(3) Prior to commencing personal data processing, a personal data processor shall
perform safety measures determined by the system controller for the protection
of the system in accordance with the requirements of this Law.
Chapter III
Rights of a Data Subject
Section 15.
(1) In addition to the rights mentioned in Sections 8 and 9 of this Law, a data
subject has the right to obtain all information that has been collected concerning
himself or herself in any system for personal data processing, unless the
disclosure of such information is prohibited by law.
(2) A data subject has the right to obtain information concerning those natural or
legal persons who within a prescribed time period have received information from
a system controller concerning this data subject. In the information to be
provided to the data subject, it is prohibited to include State institutions, which
administer criminal procedures, investigatory operations authorities or other
institutions concerning which the disclosure of such information is prohibited by
law.
(3) A data subject also has the right to request the following information:
1) the designation, or name and surname, and address of the system controller;
2) the purpose, scope and method of the personal data processing;
3) the date when the personal data concerning the data subject were last
rectified;
4) the source from which the personal data were obtained unless the disclosure of
such information is prohibited by law; and
5) the processing methods utilised for the automated processing systems,
concerning the application of which individual automated decisions are taken.
(4) A data subject has the right, within a period of one month from the date of
submission of the relevant request (not more frequently than two times a year),
to receive the information specified in this Section in writing free of charge.
Section 16.
(1) A data subject has the right to request that his or her personal data be
supplemented or rectified, as well as that their processing be suspended or that
the data be destroyed if the personal data are incomplete, outdated, false,
unlawfully obtained or are no longer necessary for the purposes for which they
were collected. If the data subject is able to substantiate that the personal data
included in the personal data processing system are incomplete, outdated, false,
unlawfully obtained or no longer necessary for the purposes for which they were
collected, the system controller has an obligation to rectify this inaccuracy or
violation without delay and notify third parties who have previously received the
processed data of such.
(2) If information has been retracted, a system controller shall ensure the
accessibility of both the new and the retracted information, and that the
information mentioned is received simultaneously by recipients thereof..
Section 17.
Section 15 and 16 of this Law are not applicable if the processed data are used
only for the needs of scientific and statistical research and, on the basis of such,
no activities are carried out and no decisions are taken regarding the data
subject.
Section 18.
A person is not required to comply with an individual decision which has been
taken only upon the basis of data processed automatically. The person may be
made subject to such aforementioned decision if it has been taken in accordance
with law or a contract entered into with the data subject.
Section 19.
A data subject has the right to object to the processing of his or her personal data
if such will be used for commercial purposes.
Section 20.
A data subject has the right to appeal to the State Data Inspection the refusal of
a system controller to provide the information mentioned in Section 15 of this
Law or perform the activities mentioned in Section 16 of this Law.
Chapter IV
Registration and Protection of a Personal Data Processing System
Section 21.
(1) All State and local government institutions, and other natural persons and
legal persons which carry out or wish to commence carrying out personal data
processing, and establish systems for personal data processing, shall register
such in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this Law unless otherwise
prescribed by law.
(2) The registration procedure prescribed by this Law is not applicable to the
personal data processing carried out in the areas of public safety, combating of
crime or national security and defence, by institutions specially authorised by law.
Section 22.
(1) The institutions and persons mentioned in Section 21 of this Law which wish
to commence personal data processing and establish a system for personal data
processing shall submit an application for registration to the State Data
Inspection which includes the following information:
1) the designation (name and surname), registration code, address and telephone
number of the institution or person (system controller);
2) the name, surname, personal identity number, address and telephone number
of a person authorised by the system controller;
3) the legal basis for the operation of the personal data processing system;
4) the type of personal data to be included in the system, the purposes for which
it is intended and the scope of personal data to be processed;
5) the categories of data subjects;
6) the categories of recipients of personal data;
7) the intended method of personal data processing;
8) the planned method of obtaining personal data and a mechanism for the
control of their quality;
9) other data processing systems which will be connected with the system to be
registered;
10) what personal data connected systems will be able to obtain from the system
to be registered, and what data the system to be registered will be able to obtain
from connected systems;
11) the method for transferring data from the system to be registered to another
system;
12) the identification codes of natural persons as will be used by the system to be
registered;
13) the method for exchanging information with the data subject;
14) the procedures whereby a personal data subject is entitled to obtain
information concerning himself or herself and other information mentioned in
Sections 8 and 9 of this Law;
15) the procedures for supplementing and updating of personal data;
16) technical and organisational measures ensuring the protection of personal
data; and
17) what personal data will be transferred to other states.
(2) Prior to registration of a personal data processing system, the State Data
Inspection shall perform an inspection of the personal data processing system.
(3) When registering a personal data processing system, the State Data
Inspection shall issue a certificate of registration of the personal data processing
system to a system controller or to a person authorised by him or her.
(4) Prior to changes being made to the information mentioned in Paragraph one
of this Section, they shall be registered in the State Data Inspection.
Section 23.
The State Data Inspection may refuse to register a personal data processing
system, if:
1) all of the information mentioned in Section 22 of this Law is not submitted; or
2) on inspection of the personal data processing system, violations are
determined.
Section 24.
(1) The State Data Inspection shall include the information mentioned in Section
22 of this Law in the register for personal data processing systems. The register
shall be accessible to the general public.
(2) Information concerning the registered personal data processing systems shall
be published in accordance with the procedures prescribed in regulatory
enactments.
Section 25.
(1) A system controller has an obligation to apply the necessary technical and
organisational measures to protect personal data and prevent their illegal
processing.
(2) A system controller shall control the form of personal data entered in the
personal data processing system and the time of recording and is responsible for
the actions of persons who carry out personal data processing.
Section 26.
The mandatory technical and organisational requirements for the protection of
personal data processing systems shall be determined by the Cabinet.
Section 27.
(1) Natural persons involved in personal data processing shall make a
commitment in writing to preserve and not, in an unlawful manner, disclose
personal data. Such persons have a duty not to disclose the personal data even
after termination of legal employment or other contractually specified relations.
(2) A system controller is obliged to record the persons mentioned in Paragraph
one of this Section.
(3) When processing personal data, a processor of the personal data shall comply
with the instructions of the system controller.
Section 28.
(1) Personal data may be transferred to another state if that state ensures such
level of data protection as corresponds to the relevant level of the data protection
in effect in Latvia and written consent has been obtained from the State Data
Inspection.
(2) Exemption from compliance with the requirements of Paragraph one of this
Section is permissible if at least one of the following conditions is complied with:
1) the data subject has given consent to the transfer of the data to another state;
2) the transfer of the data is required to fulfil an agreement between the data
subject and the system controller, or the personal data are required to be
transferred in accordance with contractual obligations binding upon the data
subject;
3) the transfer of the data is required and requested, pursuant to prescribed
procedures, in accordance with significant state or public interests, or is required
for judicial proceedings;
4) the transfer of the data is necessary to protect the life and health of the data
subject; or
5) the transfer of the data concerns such personal data as are public or have
been accumulated in a publicly accessible register.
Section 29.
(1) The protection of personal data shall be carried out by the State Data
Inspection which shall be subject to the supervision of the Ministry of Justice. The
State Data Inspection shall be managed by a director who shall be appointed and
released from his or her position by the Cabinet pursuant to the recommendation
of the Minister for Justice.
(2) The State Data Inspection shall act in accordance with by-laws approved by
the Cabinet. Every year the State Data Inspection shall submit a report on its
activities to the Cabinet and shall publish it in the newspaper Latvijas Vetsnesis.
(3) The duties of the State Data Inspection in the field of personal data protection
are as follows:
1) to ensure compliance of personal data processing in the State with the
requirements of this Law;
2) to take decisions and review complaints regarding the protection of personal
data;
3) to register personal data processing systems;
4) to propose and carry out activities aimed at raising the effectiveness of
personal data protection; and
5) together with the Office of the Director General of the State Archives of Latvia,
to decide on the transfer of personal data processing systems to the State
archives for preservation thereof.
(4) In the field of personal data protection, the rights of the State Data Inspection
are as follows:
1) in accordance with the procedures prescribed by regulatory enactments, to
receive, free of charge, information from natural persons and legal persons as is
necessary for the performance of functions pertaining to inspection;
2) to perform inspection of a personal data processing system prior to its
registration;
3) to require that data be blocked, that incorrect or unlawfully obtained data be
erased or destroyed, or to order a permanent or temporary prohibition of data
processing; and
4) to bring an action in court for violations of this Law.
Section 30.
(1) In order to perform the duties mentioned in Section 29, Paragraph three of
this Law, the director of the State Data Inspection and the inspectors authorised
by the director, upon presenting their official identification cards, have the right:
1) to freely enter any non-residential premises where personal data processing
systems are located, and in the presence of a representative of the system
controller carry out necessary inspections or other measures in order to
determine the compliance of the personal data processing procedure with law;2) to require written or verbal explanations from any natural or legal person
involved in personal data processing;
3) to require that documents are produced and other information is provided
which relate to the personal data processing system being inspected;
4) to require inspection of a personal data processing system, or of any facility or
information carrier of such, and to determine that an expert examination be
conducted regarding questions subject to investigation;
5) to request assistance of officials of law enforcement institutions, if required, in
order to ensure performance of its duties; and
6) to prepare and submit materials to law enforcement institutions in order for
offenders to be held to liability, if required.
(2) The officials of the State Data Inspection involved in registration and
inspections shall ensure that the information obtained in the process of
registration and inspections is not disclosed, except information accessible to the
general public. Such prohibition shall also remain in effect after the officials have
ceased to fulfil their official functions.
Section 31.
Decisions by the State Data Inspection may be appealed to a court.
Section 32.
If, in violating this Law, harm or losses have been caused to a person, he or she
has the right to receive commensurate compensation.
Transitional provisions
1. Chapter IV of this Law, "Registration and Protection of a Personal Data
Processing System", shall come into force on 1 January 2001.
2. The institutions and persons mentioned in Section 21 of this Law, which have
commenced operations before the coming into force of this Law, shall register
with the State Data Inspection by 1 January 2002. After expiry of this term,
unregistered systems shall cease operations.
