

DATA PROTECTION ACT [CHAPTER 11:12]
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

PART I
Preliminary
Section
1.
2.
3.
4.

Short title.
Object.
Interpretation.
Application.
PART II

Data Protection Authority

5. Designation of Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority as Data
Protection Authority.
6. Functions of Data Protection Authority.
PART III
7. Quality of data.

Quality of Data
PART IV

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

General Rules on the Processing of Data

Generality.
Purpose.
Non-sensitive data.
Sensitive information.
Genetic data, biometric sensitive data and health data.
PART V

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Duties of Data Controller and Data Processor

Duties of Data Controller.
Rights of Data Subject.
Disclosures when collecting data directly from data subject.
Disclosures when not collecting data directly from data subject.
Authority to process.
Security.
Security breach notification.
Obligation of notification to Authority.
Content of notification.
Authorisation.
Openness of processing.
Accountability.

41


PART VI
Data Subject

Section
25. Decision taken on basis of Automatic Data Processing.
26. Representation of data subjection who is a child.
27. Representation of physically, mentally or legally incapacitated data subjects.
PART VII
Transborder Flow
28. Transfer of personal information outside Zimbabwe.
29. Transfer to country outside the Republic of Zimbabwe which does not assure
adequate level of protection.
PART VIII
Code of Conduct
30. Code of conduct.

PART IX

Whistleblowing
31. Whistleblower.
PART X
32. Regulations.
33. Offences and penalties.
34. Appeals.

General Provisions

PART XI

Consequential Amendments
35. Amendment of Chapter VIII of Cap. 9:23.
36. Amendment of Cap. 9:07.
37. Amendment of Cap. 11:20.

42

ACT
An Act to provide for data protection with due regard to the Declaration of
Rights under the Constitution and the public and national interest; to
establish a Data Protection Authority and to provide for their functions;
to create a technology driven business environment and encourage
technological development and the lawful use of technology; to amend
sections 162 to 166 of the Criminal Code (Codification and Reform) Act
[Chapter 9:23] to provide for investigation and collection of evidence
of cyber crime and unauthorised data collection and breaches, and to
provide for admissibility of electronic evidence for such offences; to
amend the Interception of Communications Act [Chapter 11:20] to
establish a Cyber Security Centre and to provide for matters connected
with or incidental to the foregoing.
ENACTED by the Parliament and the President of Zimbabwe.

PART I
Preliminary
1

Short title
This Act may be cited as the Data Protection Act [Chapter 11:22].

2

Object

The object of this Act is to increase data protection in order to build confidence
and trust in the secure use of information and communication technologies by data
controllers, their representatives and data subjects.
Printed by the Government Printer, Harare
43

Interpretation
In this Act—

“child” means any person under the age of eighteen years;

“code of conduct” refers to the Data Use Charters drafted by the data controller
in order to institute the rightful use of IT resources, the Internet, and
electronic communications of the structure concerned, and which have
been approved by the Data Protection Authority;

“consent” refers to any manifestation of specific unequivocal, freely given,
informed expression of will by which the data subject or his or her legal,
judicial or legally appointed representative accepts that his or her data
be processed;

“critical database” means a computer data storage medium or any part thereof
which contains critical data;

“data” means any representation of facts, concepts, information, whether in text,
audio, video, images, machine-readable code or instructions, in a form
suitable for communications, interpretation or processing in a computer
device, computer system, database, electronic communications network
or related devices and includes a computer programme and traffic data;
“data controller” or “controller”—
(a) refers to any natural person or legal person who is licensable by the
Authority;
(b) includes public bodies and any other person who determines the
purpose and means of processing data;
“data controller’s representative” or “controller’s representative” refers to any
natural person or legal person who performs the functions of the data
controller in compliance with obligations set forth in this Act;

“Data processor” refers to a natural person or legal person, who processes data
for and on behalf of the controller and under the controller’s instruction,
except for the persons who, under the direct employment or similar
authority of the controller, are authorised to process the data;

“Data Protection Authority” or “Authority” refers to Postal and
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe established in
terms of section 5 of the Postal and Telecommunications Act [Chapter
12:05];

“data protection officer” or “DPO” refers to any individual appointed by the
data controller and is charged with ensuring, in an independent manner,
compliance with the obligations provided for in this Act;
“data subject” refers to an individual who is an identifiable person and the
subject of data;

“disproportionate effort” means effort that is so labour intensive as to consume
a lot of time, money and manpower resources;

“electronic communications network” means any electronic communication
infrastructure and facilitie used for the conveyance of data;

“genetic data: refers to any personal information stemming from a
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis;
“health professional” refers to any individual determined as such in terms of
the Health Professions Act [Chapter 27:19];
“identifiable person” means a person who can be identified directly or indirectly,
in particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more
44

factors specific to his or her physical, physiological, mental, economic,
cultural or social identity;

“Minister” means the Minister responsible for information and communications
technologies;

“personal information” means information relating to a data subject, and
includes—
(a) the person’s name, address or telephone number;
(b) the person’s race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religious or
political beliefs or associations;
(c) the person’s age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status or family
status;
(d) an identifying number, symbol or other particulars assigned to that
person;
(e) fingerprints, blood type or inheritable characteristics;
(f) information about a person’s health care history, including a physical
or mental disability;
(g) information about educational, financial, criminal or employment
history;
(h) opinions expressed about an identifiable person;
(i) the individual’s personal views or opinions, except if they are about
someone else; and
(j) personal correspondence pertaining to home and family life;
“processing” refers to any operation or set of operations which are performed
upon data, whether or not by automatic means, such as obtaining recording
or holding the data or carrying out any operation or set of operations on
data, including—
(a) organisation, adaptation or alteration of the data;
(b) retrieval, consultation or use of the data; or
(c) alignment, combination, blocking, erasure or destruction of the data;

“recipient” a natural or legal person, agency or any other body to whom personal
information is disclosed by a data controller, whether a third party or not;
however, persons who receive personal information in the framework of
a particular legal inquiry shall not be regarded as recipients;
“sensitive data” refers to—
(a) information or any opinion about an individual which reveals or
contains the following—
  (i)

racial or ethnic origin;

(iii)

membership of a political association;

(ii)

(iv)

(v)

political opinions;

religious beliefs or affiliations;
philosophical beliefs;

(vi)

membership of a professional or trade association;

(viii)

sex life;

(vii)
(ix)

(x)

membership of a trade union;

criminal educational, financial or employment history;
gender, age, marital status or family status;
45

(b) health information about an individual;
(c) genetic information about an individual;  or
(d) any information which may be considered as presenting a major
risk to the rights of the data subject;

“third party” refers to any natural or legal person or organisation other than
the data subject, the controller, the processor and anyone who, under the
direct authority of the controller or the processor, is authorised to process
the data;

“transborder flow” refers to international flows of data by the means of
transmission including data transmission electronically or by satellite;

“whistleblowing” refers to legal provisions permitting individuals to report
the behaviour of a member of their organisation which, they consider
contrary to a law or regulation or fundamental rules established by their
organisation.

4

Application

(1) This Act shall apply to matters relating to access to information, protection of privacy of information and processing and storage of data wholly or partly by
automated means: and shall be interpreted as being in addition to and not in conflict
or inconsistent with the Protection of Personal Information Act.
(2) Subject to subsection (1) this Act shall be applicable—
(a) to the processing of data carried out in the context of the effective and
actual activities of any data controller;
(b) to the processing  and storage of data by a controller who is not permanently
established in Zimbabwe, if the means used, whether electronic or otherwise
is located in Zimbabwe, and such processing and storage is not for the
purposes of the mere transit of data through Zimbabwe.
(3) In the circumstances referred to in subsection (2)(b), the controller shall
designate a representative established in Zimbabwe, without prejudice to legal
proceedings that may be brought against the controller.
PART II
Data Protection Authority
5

Designation of Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority
as Data Protection Authority

The Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority established in terms
of the Postal and Telecommunications Act [Chapter 12:05] is hereby designated as the
Data Protection Authority.
6

Functions of Data Protection Authority

(1) The Authority shall perform the following functions—
(a) to regulate the manner in which personal information may be processed
through the establishment of conditions for the lawful processing of data;
(b) to promote and enforce fair processing of data in accordance with   this
Act;
(c) to issue its opinion either of its own accord, or at the request of any person
with a legitimate interest, on any matter relating to the application of the
46

fundamental principles of the protection of privacy, in the context of this
Act;
(d) to submit to any Court any administrative act which is not compliant with
the fundamental principles of the protection of the privacy in the framework of this Act as well as any law containing provisions regarding the
protection of privacy in relation to the processing of data in consultation
with Minister responsible for Information, Publicity and Broadcasting
Services;
(e)
(f)

to advise the Minister on matters relating to right to privacy and access
to information;

to conduct inquiries or investigations either of its own accord or at the
request of the data subject or any interested person, and in relation thereto
may call upon the assistance of experts to carry out its functions and
may request the disclosure of any documents that may be of use for their
inquiry or investigation;

(g) to receive, by post or electronic means or any other equivalent means,
the complaints lodged against data processing and give feed-back to the
claimants or complainants;

(h) to investigate any complaint received in terms of this Act howsoever
received;
(i)

(j)

to conduct research on policy and legal matters relating to the development
of international best practices on the protection of personal information
in Zimbabwe and advise the Minister accordingly;
in consultation with the Minister, to facilitate cross border cooperation
in the enforcement of privacy laws and participating at national, regional
and international forums mandated to deal with the protection of personal
information initiatives.

(2) Subject to this Act, the Authority shall not, in the lawful exercise of its
functions under this Act, be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
PART III
Quality of Data
7

Quality of Data
(1) The data controller shall ensure that data processed is—
(a)

adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which
it is collected or further processed;

(b) accurate and, where necessary, kept up-to-date;
(c)

retained in a form that allows for the identification of data subjects, for
no longer than necessary with a view to the purposes for which the data
is collected or further processed.

(2) The data controller shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that data
processed shall be accessible regardless of the technology used and ensure that the
evolution of technology shall not be an obstacle to the access or processing of such
data.
(3) The controller shall ensure compliance with the obligations set out in
subsections (1) and (2) by any person working under his or her authority and any
subcontractor.
47

PART IV

General Rules on the Processing of Data
8

Generality

9

Purpose

The data controller shall ensure that the processing of data is necessary and that
the data is processed fairly and lawfully.

(1) The data controller shall ensure that data is collected for specified, explicit
and legitimate purposes and, taking into account all relevant factors, especially the
reasonable expectations of the data subject and the applicable legal and regulatory
provisions, that the data is not further processed in a way incompatible with such
purposes.
(2) Under the conditions established by the Authority, further processing of data
for historical, statistical or scientific research purposes is not considered incompatible.
10

Non-sensitive data

(1) Personal information may only be processed if the data subject or a
competent person, where the data subject is a child, consents to the processing of such
data.
(2) The consent referred to in subsection (1) may be implied where the data
subject is an adult natural person or has a legal persona and has full legal capacity to
consent.
(3) The processing of non-sensitive data is permitted, without the consent of
the data subject, where necessary for purposes of—
(a) being material as evidence in proving an offence;  or
(b) compliance with an obligation to which the controller is subject by or by
virtue of a law; or
(c) protecting the vital interests of the data subject;  or
(d) performing a task carried out in the public interest, or in the exercise of
the official authority vested in the controller, or in a third party to whom
the data is disclosed; or
(e) promoting the legitimate interests of the controller or a third party to
whom the data is disclosed, except where such interests are overridden
by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject
claiming protection under this Act.
(4) The Authority may specify the circumstances in which the condition
stipulated under subsection (3)(e) are considered as having been met.
11		

Sensitive information

(1) No data controller shall process sensitive data unless the data subject has
given consent in writing for such processing;
(2) The consent to the processing of data may be withdrawn by the data subject
at any time and without any explanation and free of charge;
(3) The Authority shall determine the circumstances in which the prohibition
to process the data referred to in this subsection (1) cannot be lifted even with the data
48

subject’s consent (taking into account the factors surrounding the prohibition and the
reasons for collecting the data).
(4) The Minister responsible for the Cyber security and Monitoring Centre in
consultation with the Minister, may give directions on how to implement this section
with respect to sensitive information affecting national security or the interests of the
State.
(5) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply where—
(a) the processing is necessary to carry out the obligations and specific rights
of the controller in the field of employment law; or
(b) the processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject
or of another person, where the data subject is physically or legally
incapable of giving his or her consent or is not represented by his or her
legal, judicial or agreed representative; or
(c) the processing is carried out in the course of its legitimate activities by
a foundation, association or any other non-profit organisation with a
political, philosophical, religious, health-insurance or trade-union purpose
and on condition that the processing relates solely to the members of the
organisation or to persons who have regular contact with it in connection
with such purposes and that the data is not disclosed to a third party
without the data subjects’ consent; or
(d) the processing is necessary to comply with national security laws;  or
(e) the processing is necessary, with appropriate guarantees, for the
establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; or
(f) the processing relates to data which has been made public by the data
subject; or
(g) the processing is necessary for the purposes of scientific research:
				
Provided the Authority shall be entitled to specify the conditions
under which such processing may be carried out; or
(h) the processing of data is authorised by a law or any regulation for any
other reason constituting substantial public interest.
(6) Without prejudice to the application of sections 5 to 8, the processing of
data relating to sex life is authorised if—
(a) it is carried out by an association with a legal personality or by an
organisation of public interest whose main objective, according to its
Memorandum and Articles of Association, is the evaluation, guidance
or treatment of persons of such sexual conduct, and who is recognised
by a competent public body as being responsible for the welfare of such
persons;
(b) the objective of the processing of the data consist of the evaluation,
guidance and treatment of the persons referred to in this section, and the
processing of data relates only to the afore-mentioned persons:
Provided that the competent public body referred to in paragraph (a) grants a
specific, individualised authorisation, having received the opinion of the Authority.
(7) The authorisation referred to in this section shall specify the duration of the
authorisation, the conditions for supervision of the authorised association or organisation
by the competent public body, and the way in which the processing must be reported
to the Authority.

Genetic data, biometric sensitive data and health data

(1) The processing of genetic data, biometric data and health data is prohibited
unless, the data subject has given consent in writing to the processing.
(2) The consent referred to in subsection (1) can be withdrawn by the data
subject at any time without any reasons and free of charge.
(3) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply where—
(a) the processing is necessary to carry out the specific obligations and rights
of the controller in the field of employment law; or
(b) the processing is necessary to comply with national security laws; or
(c) the processing is necessary for the promotion and protection of public
health, including medical examination of the population; or
(d) the processing is required by or by virtue of a law or any equivalent
legislative act for reasons of substantial public interest; or
(e) the processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject
or another person, where the data subject is physically or legally incapable
of giving his or her consent or is not represented by his or her legal, judicial
or agreed representative; or
(f) the processing is necessary for the prevention of imminent danger or the
mitigation of a specific criminal offence; or
(g) the processing relates to data which has apparently been made public by
the data subject; or
(h) the processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defense of
legal rights; or
(i) the processing is required for the purposes of scientific research; or
(j) the processing is necessary for the purposes of preventive medicine or
medical diagnosis, the provision of care or treatment for the data subject
or to one of his or her relatives, or the management of health-care services
in the interest of the data subject, and the data is processed under the
supervision of a health professional.
(4) Health-related data may only be processed under the responsibility of a
health-care professional, except if the data subject has given his or her written consent
or if the processing is necessary for the prevention of imminent danger or for the
mitigation of a specific criminal offence.
(5) The Authority shall be entitled to specify the conditions under which such
processing may be carried out.
(6) Health related data may only be collected from other sources where the
data subject is incapable of providing the data.
(7) For the purposes of processing personal information under this section, the
health professional and his or her agents are subject to the duty of professional secrecy.
(8) The processing of genetic data, shall be authorised if it is processed for what
it reveals or contains and data concerning health shall be processed only if a unique
patient identifier is given to the patient which is distinct from any other identification
number, issued by the public authority established for this purpose.
(9) The association of the unique patient identifier with any other identifier
which permits the identification of the data subject as provided for in section 8 is
permissible only with the express authorisation of the Authority.
(10) The data of a child shall be processed subject to section 26.
50

PART V

Duties of Data Controller and Data Processor
13
is—

Duties of Data Controller
Every data controller or data processor shall ensure that personal information
(a) processed in accordance with the right to privacy of the data subject;
(b) processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to any
data subject;
(c) collected for explicit, specified and legitimate purposes and not further
processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes;
(d) adequate, relevant, limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes
for which it is processed;
(e) collected only where a valid explanation is provided whenever information
relating to family or private affairs is required;
(f) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date, with every reasonable
step being taken to ensure that any inaccurate personal data is erased or
rectified without delay; and

kept in a form which identifies the data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the
purposes which it was collected.
14

Rights of Data Subject
A data subject has a right to—
(a) be informed of the use to which their personal information is to be put;
(b) access their personal information in custody of data controller or data
processor;
(c) object to the processing of all or part of their personal information;
(d) correction of false or misleading personal information; and;
(e) deletion of false or misleading data about them.

15

Disclosures when collecting data directly from data subject

(1) When obtaining data directly from the data subject, the controller or the
controller’s representative shall provide the data subject with at least the following
information, unless the data subject has already received such information—
(a) the name and address of the controller and of his or her representative, if
any;
(b) the purposes of the processing;
(c)    the existence of the right to object, by request and free of charge, to the
intended processing of data relating to him or her, if it is obtained for the
purposes of direct marketing;
(d) whether compliance with the request for information is compulsory or
not, as well as what the consequences of the failure to comply are;
(e) taking into account the   specific circumstances in which the data is
collected, any supporting information, as necessary to ensure fair
processing for the data subject, such as—
(i) the recipients or categories of recipients of the data;
(ii) whether it is compulsory to reply, and what the possible consequences
of the failure to reply are;
51

(f)
16

Cap. 11:22

(iii) the existence of the right to access and rectify the data relating to
him or her except where such additional information, taking into
account the specific circumstances in which the data is collected is
not necessary to guarantee accurate processing.
other information dependent on the specific nature of the processing, as
specified by the Authority.

Disclosures when not collecting data directly from data subject

(1) Where the data is not collected from the data subject, the controller or his
or her representative shall provide the data subject with at least the information set out
below when recording the data or considering communication to a third party, unless
it is established that the data subject is in receipt of such information—
(a) the name and address of the controller and of his or her representative, if
any;
(b) the purposes of the processing;
(c) whether compliance with the request for information is compulsory or
not, as well as what the consequences of the failure to comply are;
(d) the existence of the right to object, by request and free of charge, to the
intended processing of data relating to him or her, if it is obtained for
the purposes of direct marketing; in which case, the data subject shall be
informed prior to the first disclosure of the data to a third party or prior
to the first use of the data for the purposes of direct marketing on behalf
of third parties;
(e) taking into account the specific circumstances in which the data is
collected, any supporting information, as necessary to ensure fair
processing such as—
(i) the categories of data concerned;
(ii) the recipients or categories of recipients of the data;
(iii) the existence of the right to access and rectify the data relating to
him/her, unless such additional information, taking into account the
specific circumstances in which the data is provided, is not necessary
to guarantee fair processing with respect to the data subject;
(f) other information dependent on the specific nature of the processing,
which is specified by the Authority.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply where—
(a) informing the data subject proves impossible or would involve a
disproportionate effort, in particular for data collected for statistical
purposes or for the purpose of historical or scientific research, or for the
purpose of medical examination of the population with a view to protecting
and promoting public health; or
(b) data is recorded or provided in terms of the law;
section.
17

(3) The Authority shall establish the conditions for the application of this

Authority to process

Any person having access to the data and acting under the authority of the controller
or of the processor, as well as the processor himself or herself, may process data only
as instructed by the controller, without prejudice to any duty imposed by law.

52

Security

(4) In order to safeguard the security, integrity and confidentiality of the data, the
controller or his or her representative, if any, or the processor, shall take the appropriate
technical and organisational measures that are necessary to protect data from negligent
or unauthorised destruction, negligent loss, unauthorised alteration or access and any
other unauthorised processing of the data.
(5) These measures referred to in subsection (1) must ensure an appropriate
level of security taking into account the state of technological development and the
cost of implementing the measures on the one hand, and the nature of the data to be
protected and the potential risks to the data subject on the other hand.
(6) The Authority may issue appropriate standards relating to information
security for all or certain categories of processing.
(7) The data controller shall appoint data processor who provide sufficient
guarantees regarding the technical and organisational security measures employed to
protect the data associated with the processing undertaken and ensure strict adherence
to such measures.
(8) The data controller shall enter into a written contract or any other legal
instrument with the data processor which ensures that the data processor maintains
security measures on data.
19

Security breach notification

20

Obligation of notification to Authority

The data controller shall notify the Authority “within twenty-four (24) hours of
any security breach affecting data he or she processes.

(1) Prior to any wholly or partly automated operation or set of operations
intended to serve a single purpose or several related purposes, the controller or his or
her representative, if any, must notify the Authority.
(2) Any modification to the information provided according to section 16 must
be notified to the Authority.
(3) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply to operations having the
sole purpose of keeping a register that is intended to provide information to the public
by virtue of operation of law and that is open to access by the general public or by any
person demonstrating a legitimate interest.
(4) The Authority may exempt certain categories from notification under this
section if—
(a) taking into account the data being processed, there is no apparent risk of
infringement of the data subjects’ rights and freedoms, and if the purposes
of the processing, the categories of data being processed, the categories
of data subjects, the categories of recipients and the data retention period
are specified;
(b) the data controller has appointed a data protection officer.
(5) The appointment of the data protection officer shall be duly notified to the
Authority.
(6) The Authority shall provide guidelines that provide for the qualifications
and functions of data protection officer and such data protection officer’s duties shall  
include—
53

(a)

ensuring compliance by the data controller with the provisions of this Act
and regulations made thereunder;
(b) dealing with requests made to the data controller pursuant to this Act;
(c) working with the Authority in relation to the performance of its functions
in relation to the data controller.
(7) If exemption from the duty of notification has been granted for automatic
processing in accordance with the subsection 3, the data controller may disclose the
items of information mentioned in section 16 to any person entitled to receive such
information.
21

Content of notification

(1) The notification referred to in section 20 shall state, at least—
(a) the date of notification and the law or regulatory instrument permitting
the automatic processing of data;
(b) the surname, first names and complete address or the name and registered
offices of the controller and of his or her representative, if any;
(c) the denomination of the automatic processing;
(d) the purpose or the set of related purposes of the automatic processing;
(e) the categories of data being processed and a detailed description of the
sensitive data being processed;
(f) a description of the category or categories of the data subjects;
(g) the safeguards that must be linked to the disclosure of the data to third
parties;
(h) the manner in which the data subjects are informed, the service providing
for the exercise of the right to access and the measures taken to facilitate
the exercise of that right;
(i) the inter-related processing planned or any other form of linking with
other processing;
(j) the period of time after the expiration of which the data may no longer
be stored, used or disclosed;
(k) a general description containing a preliminary assessment of whether the
security measures provided for pursuant to section 13 above are adequate;
(l) the recourse to a data processor, if any;
(m) the transfers of data to a third country as planned by the data controller.

(2) The Authority may prescribe other information which shall be mentioned
in the notification.

(3) Where the Authority is of the opinion that the processing or transfer of
data by a data controller entails specific risks to the privacy rights of data subjects, he
or she may inspect and assess the security and organisational measures prior to the
commencement of the processing or transfer.

(4) The Authority may, during working hours, carry out further inspection and
assessment of the security and organisational measures employed by a data controller
subject to reasonable notification to the data controller of the Authority’s intended
inspection and assessment.
22

Authorisation

(1) The Authority shall establish the categories of data processing which
represent specific risks to the fundamental rights of the data subject and which require
specific authorisation from the Authority.
54

(2) Such authorisation shall only be provided following receipt of notification
from the data controller or from the data protection officer pursuant to sections 15 and
16.
23

Openness of processing

of data.

(1) The Authority shall keep a register of all automatic processing operations

(2) Any entry in the register referred to in subsection (1) must include the
information mentioned in section 16(1).

(3) The register shall be available for inspection by members of the public, in
the manner determined by the Authority.

(4) In case of the processing of data exempted from notification by this Act, the
Authority may, either by virtue of its office or at the data subject’s request, impose upon
the controller the obligation to disclose to the data subject all or part of the information
mentioned in section 16(1).
24

Accountability
(1) The data controller shall—
(a) take all the necessary measures to comply with the principles and
obligations set out in this Act; and
(b) have the necessary internal mechanisms in place for demonstrating such
compliance to both the data subjects and the Authority in the exercise of
its powers.
PART VI
Data Subject

25

Decision taken on basis of Automatic Data Processing

(1) The data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision based
solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces legal effects
concerning him or her or similarly significantly affects him or her.
(2) The right referred to in subsection (1) shall not be applicable if the decision
based solely on automated processing is taken on the basis of the data subject having
consented to such decision or is based on a provision established by law.
26

Representation of data subject who is child

27

Representation of physically, mentally or legally incapacitated data
subjects

Where the data subject is a child, his or her rights pursuant to this law may be
exercised by his or her parents or legal guardian.

(1) A data subject who is physically, mentally or legally incapable of exercising
the rights given under this Act and who is not subject to the provisions of section 26,
may exercise such rights through a parent or guardian or as provided for by law or as
designated by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Incapacity as referred to in subsection (1) shall be proven by a physician
or a person legally competent to do so.
55

PART VII
Transborder Flow
28 Transfer of personal information outside Zimbabwe
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a data controller may not transfer
personal information about a data subject to a third party who is in a foreign country
unless an adequate level of protection is ensured in the country of the recipient or within
the recipient international organisation and the data is transferred solely to allow tasks
covered by the competence of the controller to be carried out.
(2) The adequacy of the level of protection afforded by the third country
or international organisation in question shall be assessed in the light of all the
circumstances surrounding a data transfer operation or set of data transfer operations;
with particular consideration being given to the nature of the data, the purpose and
duration of the proposed processing operation or operations, the recipient third country
or recipient international organisation, the laws relating to data protection in force in
the third country or international organisation in question and the professional rules
and security measures which are complied with in that third country or international
organisation.
(3) The Authority shall lay down the categories of processing operations  for
which and the circumstances in which the transfer of data to countries outside the
Republic of Zimbabwe is not authorised.
(4) The Minister responsible for the Cyber security and Monitoring Centre in
consultation with the Minister, may give directions on how to implement this section
with respect to transfer of personal information outside of Zimbabwe.
29

Transfer to country outside Zimbabwe which does not assure
adequate level of protection

(1) A transfer or a set of transfers of data to a country outside Zimbabwe which
does not assure an adequate level of protection may take place in one of the following
cases—
(a) the data subject has unambiguously given his or her consent to the
proposed transfer;
(b) the transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract between the
data subject and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual
measures taken in response to the data subject’s request;
(c) the transfer is necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract
concluded or to be concluded between the controller and a third party in
the interest of the data subject;
(d) the transfer is necessary or legally required on important public interest
grounds, or for the establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims;
(e) the transfer is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data
subject;
(f) the transfer is made from a register which, according to acts or regulations,
is intended to provide information to the public and which is open to
consultation either by the public in general or by any person who can
demonstrate a legitimate interest, to the extent that the conditions laid
down in law for consultation are fulfilled in the case at hand.

56

PART VIII
Code of Conduct
30

Code of Conduct

(1) The Authority shall provide guidelines and approve codes of conduct and
ethics governing the rules of conduct to be observed by data controllers and categories
of data controllers.

(2) In effecting (1) above, the Authority shall consider trade associations and
other bodies representing other categories of controllers who have national codes or
have the intention of amending or extending existing national codes and allow them
to submit such codes for the approval of the Authority.
(3) The Authority in considering codes of conduct for approval, shall ascertain,
among other things, whether the Codes submitted comply with the provisions of this
Act.
(4) If it deems it fit, the Authority shall seek the views of affected data subjects
or their representatives.
PART IX
Whistleblowing

31

Whistleblower

(1) The Authority shall establish rules giving the authorisation for and governing
the whistleblowing system.
(2) Rules established in terms of subsection (1) must preserve—
(a) the principles of fairness, lawfulness and purpose of the processing;
(b) the principles related to the proportionality on the limitation of the scope,
accuracy of the data which will be processed;
(c) the principle of openness and delivering an adequate system for the
collection of personal information shall address—
(i) the scope and purpose of the whistleblowing;
(ii) the processing of reporting;
(iii) the consequences of the justified and unjustified reporting;
(iv) the way of exercising the rights of access, correction, deletion as
well as the competent authority to which a request can be made; and
(v) the third party who may receive data concerning the informer and
the person who is implicated in the scope of the processing of the
report;
(vi) the technical and organisational rules;
(vii) rules concerning the rights of the data subject by making clear that
the right of access doesn’t allow to access to data linked to a third
person without his or her express and written consent; and
(viii) the method of notifying the Authority.
(3) The person who is implicated shall be informed as soon as possible of the
existence of the report and about the facts which he or she is accused of in order to
exercise the rights established in this Act.
(4) The release of information to the person who is implicated may be withheld
in exceptional circumstances.
57

PART X

General Provisions
32

Regulations

(1) The Minister may, in consultation with the Authority, make regulations
providing for all matters which by this Act are required or permitted to be prescribed or
which, in his or her opinion, are necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying
out or giving effect to this Act.
(2) Regulations referred to in subsection (1) may provide for the exercise of
the rights referred to in sections 25 to 27 of the Act.
33

Offences and penalties

(1) Any member of staff of the Authority or any expert, contractor, subcontractor who violates the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of an offence and
liable to a fine not exceeding level 7 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
two years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(2) Any data controller, his or her representative, agent or assignee who
contravenes section 11, 13, 18(4), 24 and 28 shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to a fine not exceeding level 11 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding seven
years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(3) Upon conviction by a Court of competent jurisdiction the Court may order
the seizure of the media containing the data to which the offence relates, such as manual
filing systems, magnetic discs or magnetic tapes, except for computers or any other
equipment, or the deletion of the data.
(4) Seizure or deletion may be ordered where the media containing the data
does not belong to the person convicted.
(5) The objects seized in terms of this section shall be destroyed.
(6) The controller or his or her representative shall be liable for the payment
of the fines incurred by his or her agent or assignee.
34

Appeals

Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority may appeal to the
Administrative Court.
PART XI

Consequential Amendments
35

Amendment of Chapter VIII of Cap. 9:23

(1) The Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act [Chapter 9:23] (hereinafter
called the “principal Act”) is amended in section 162 by the repeal of the definitions of
“computer virus”, “data”, “essential service” and “owner” and the substitution of the
following definitions—
““access provider” means any person providing—
(a) an electronic data transmission service by transmitting information
provided by, or to, a user of the service in a communication network;
or
(b) access to a communication network;
58

“caching provider” means any person providing an electronic data transmission
service by automatic, intermediate or temporary storage of information
performed for the sole purpose of making the onward transmission of
data to other users of the service upon their request more efficient;
“child” means any person under the age of eighteen years;

“child pornography” means any representation through publication, exhibition,
cinematography, electronic means or any other means whatsoever, of
a child engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activity, or any
representation of the sexual parts of a child for primarily sexual purposes;

“computer device” means any portable and non-portable electronic
programmable device used or designed, whether by itself or as part
of a computer network, a database, a critical database, an electronic
communications network or critical information infrastructure or any
other device or equipment or any part thereof, to perform predetermined
arithmetic, logical, routing or storage operations in accordance with set
instructions and includes—
(a) input devices;
(b) output devices;
(c) processing devices;
(d) computer data storage mediums;
(e) in an aggravating circumstance certified by the Cyber Security and
Monitoring Interception of Communications Centre to be a breach
of State Security to a fine not exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and such
imprisonment;
(f) programmes; and
(g) other equipment and devices;

that are related to, connected or used with, such a device or any part
thereof and “device” shall be construed accordingly;
“computer data storage medium” means any device or location from which data
is capable of being reproduced or on which data is capable of being stored,
by a computer device, irrespective of whether the device is physically
attached to or connected with the computer device;
“computer system” means interconnected or related computer devices, one or
more of which uses a programme to perform the automatic processing
of data, exchange data with each other or any other computer system or
connect to an electronic communications network;
“critical information infrastructure” means computer systems, devices,
networks, computer programmes, computer data, so vital to the country
that the incapacity or destruction of or interference with such systems and
assets would have a debilitating impact on security, defence, economic
and international affairs, public health and safety, or to essential services
as defined in section 19 of the Criminal Law Code including the banking
system and “critical data” shall be construed accordingly;
“data” means any representation of facts, concepts, information, whether in text,
audio, video, images, machine-readable code or instructions, in a form
suitable for communications, interpretation or processing in a computer
device, computer system, database, electronic communications network
or related devices and includes a computer programme and traffic data;
“hosting provider” means any person providing an electronic data transmission
service by storing of information provided by a user of the service;

		

59

“hyperlink” means a characteristic or property of an element such as symbol,
word, phrase, sentence or image that contains information about another
source and points to and causes to display another document when
executed;
“information and communications technologies” means a device or interconnected or related devices that are used or that are responsible for the
creation, transmission, receiving, processing or collation of digital data
by making use of computer, software, networking, telecommunications,
Internet, programming and information system technologies;
“information system” means a device or inter-connected or related devices, one
or more of which uses a programme to automatically processes computer
data as well as computer data stored, processed, retrieved or transmitted
by that device or inter-connected or related devices for the purposes of
its or their operation, use, protection or maintenance;
“pornography” includes any representation, through publication, exhibition,
cinematography, electronic means or any other means whatsoever, of
a person engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activity, or any
representation of the sexual parts of a person for primarily sexual purposes;
“programme” means data or a set of instructions which, when executed in a
computer, causes the computer to perform a function;
“service provider” means—
(a) any person that provides to users of its service the ability
to communicate by means of information communication
technology systems, and
(b) any person that processes or stores information and
communications data on behalf of such communications service
or users of such service;
		
and includes—
(c) access, caching and hosting provider;
“system” means an arrangement of data or one or more programmes which,
when executed, performs a function;
“traffic data” means data relating to a communication by means of an
information communications system or generated by an information
communications system that forms a part of the chain of communications
indicating the communication’s origin, destination, route, format, time,
date, size, duration or type of the underlying service;
“utilise” in relation to a remote forensic tool includes—
(a) developing a remote forensic tool;
(b) adopting a remote forensic tool; and
(c) purchasing a remote forensic tool.”.
(2) The principal Act is amended by the repeal of sections 163 to 166 and the
substitution of the following—
“PART I

Offences Relating to Computer Systems, Computer Data,
Data Storage Mediums, Data Codes and Devices
163 Hacking
(1) A person who—
(a) knowing or suspecting that he or she must obtain prior
authority to access the data, computer programme, computer
60

data storage medium, or the whole or any part of a computer
system in question; and
(b) intentionally, unlawfully and without such authority, secures
access to such data, programme, medium or system;
shall be guilty of hacking and liable—
(c) in any of the aggravating circumstances described in section
13 to a fine not exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for
a period not exceeding ten years or both such fine and such
imprisonment;
(d) in any other case, to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to
both such fine and such imprisonment.
(2) For the purposes of this section “secure access” includes—
(a) to obtain, to make use of, gain entry into, view, display,
instruct or communicate with, or store data in or retrieve
data from;
(b) to copy, move, add, change or remove data, critical data or
a critical database, or otherwise to make use of, configure
or reconfigure any resources of a computer device, a
computer network, a database, a critical database, an
electronic communications network, a critical information
infrastructure, whether in whole or in part, including their
logical, arithmetical, memory, access codes, transmission,
data storage, processor or memory function, whether
physical, virtual, by direct or indirect means or by electronic,
magnetic, audio, optical or any other means.
163A Unlawful acquisition of data
(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally—
(a) intercepts by technical or any other means any private
transmission of computer data to, from or within a computer
network, computer device, database or information system or
electromagnetic emissions from a computer or information
system carrying such computer data;
(b) overcomes or circumvents any protective security measure
intended to prevent access to data; and
(c) acquires data within a computer system or data which is
transmitted to or from a computer system;
shall be guilty of unlawful acquisition of data and shall be liable to a fine
not exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
five years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.

(2) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally possesses
data knowing that such data was acquired unlawfully shall be guilty of
unlawful possession of data and liable to a fine not exceeding level 14 or
to imprisonment not exceeding five years or to both such fine and such
imprisonment.
(3) For the purposes of this section “acquire” includes to use,
examine, capture, copy, move to a different location or divert data to a
destination other than its intended location.
61

(4) Any person who contravenes this section in any of the
aggravating circumstances described in section 13 shall be liable to a fine
not exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten
years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
163B Unlawful interference with data or data storage medium
(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally interferes with
computer data or a data storage medium by—
(a)

damaging, corrupting, impairing or deteriorating computer
data; or

(b) deleting computer data; or
(c)

altering computer data; or

(e)

obstructing, interrupting or interfering with the lawful use
of computer data; or

(d) rendering computer data meaningless, useless or ineffective;
or

(f)

obstructing, interrupting or interfering with any person in
the lawful use of computer data; or

(g) denying, hindering, blocking access to computer data to any
person authorised to access it; or

(h) maliciously creating, altering or manipulating any data,
programme or system in whole or in part which is intended
for installation in a computer;
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to both such
fine and such imprisonment.
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) in any of the
aggravating circumstances described in section 13 is liable to a fine not
exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten
years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
163C Unlawful interference with computer system

(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally interferes
with the use of a computer or information system, computer device, an
electronic communications system or critical information infrastructure
by blocking, hindering, impeding, interrupting, altering or impairing the
functioning of, access to or the integrity of, a computer device, computer
or information system, an electronic communications network or critical
information infrastructure shall be guilty of unlawful interference with
computer or information system and liable to a fine not exceeding level
14 or to imprisonment not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and
such imprisonment.
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) in any of the
aggravating circumstances described in section 13 is liable to a fine not
exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding twenty
years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.

62

163D Unlawful disclosure of data code

(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally—
(a) communicates, discloses or transmits any computer data,
programme, access code or command or any other means of
gaining access to any programme or data held in a computer
or information system to any person not authorised to access
the computer data, programme, code or command for any
purpose;
(b) activates or installs or downloads a programme that is
designed to create, destroy, mutilate, remove or modify
any data, programme or other form of information existing
within or outside a computer or computer system; or
(c) creates, alters or destroys a password, personal identification
number, code or any method used to access a computer or
computer network;

shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 12
or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years or both such fine
or such imprisonment.
is—

(2) A person shall not be liable under this section if the action
(a)

pursuant to measures that can be taken in terms of section
39; or
(b) authorised under the law.

(3) Where an offence under this section is committed in relation
to data that forms part of a database or that involves national security or
the provision of an essential service, the penalty shall be imprisonment
for a period not exceeding ten years.
(4) For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether the
intended effect of the illegal interference is permanent or merely temporary.
163E Unlawful use of data or devices
(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally acquires,
possesses, produces, sells, procures for use, imports, distributes, supplies,
uses or makes available an access code, password, a computer programme
designed or adapted for the purpose of committing an offence or similar
data or device by which the whole or any part of a computer or information
system is capable of being accessed, for purposes of the commission or
attempted commission of an offence in terms of this Act, shall be guilty of
an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 12 or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding ten years or both such fine or such imprisonment.
(2) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally assembles,
obtains, sells, purchases, possesses, makes available, advertises or uses
malicious software, programmes or devices for purposes of causing
damage to data, computer or information systems and networks, electronic
communications networks, critical information infrastructure or computer
devices shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding
level 10 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or both
such fine and such imprisonment.
63

(3) Any person who contravenes this section in any of the
aggravating circumstances described in section 13 shall be liable to a
fine not exceeding level 12 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
ten years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
163F Aggravating circumstances

			
In this Part, an offence is committed in aggravating circumstances
if—
(a) committed in connection with or in furtherance of the
commission or attempted commission of a crime against
the State specified in Part III of the Criminal Law Code;
(b) it is intended for or results in damaging, destroying or
prejudicing the safe operation of an aircraft;
(c) it is intended to conceal or disguise the proceeds of unlawful
dealing in dangerous drugs or the enjoyment thereof;
(d) it results in defeating or obstructing the course of justice;
(e) it seriously prejudices the enforcement of the law by any
law enforcement agencies;
(f) any computer, computer network, information
communications network data, programme or system
involved is owned by the State, a law enforcement agency, the
Defence Forces, the Prison Service, a statutory corporation
or a local authority;
(g) the offence results in considerable material prejudice or
economic loss to the owner of the computer, computer
network, data, programme or system;
(h) the offence seriously interferes with or disrupts an essential
service; or
(i) the offence was committed in furtherance of organised crime
or the perpetrator was part of organised criminal gang.
PART II

Offences Relating to Electronic Communications and Materials
164 Transmission of data message inciting violence or damage to
property

			
Any person who unlawfully by means of a computer or information
system makes available, transmits, broadcasts or distributes a data
message to any person, group of persons or to the public with intend
to incite such persons to commit acts of violence against any person or
persons or to cause damage to any property shall be guilty of an offence
and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding five years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
164A Sending threatening data message

			
Any person who unlawfully and intentionally by means of a
computer or information system sends any data message to another
person threatening harm to the person or the person’s family or friends
or damage to the property of such persons shall be guilty of an offence
and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding five years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
64

		
(3) Any person who up skirts and records nude images or videos
of a citizen or a foreigner who is resident of Zimbabwe without consent
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10
or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 5 years or both such fine or
such imprisonment.
164B Cyber-bullying and harassment

			Any person who unlawfully and intentionally by means of a computer
or information system generates and sends any data message to another
person, or posts on any material whatsoever on any electronic medium
accessible by any person, with the intent to coerce, intimidate, harass,
threaten, bully or cause substantial emotional distress, or to degrade,
humiliate or demean the person of another or to encourage a person to
harm himself or herself, shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine
not exceeding level 10 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten
years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
164C Transmission of false data message intending to cause
harm

			
Any person who unlawfully and intentionally by means of a computer
or information system makes available, broadcasts or distributes data to
any other person concerning an identified or identifiable person knowing
it to be false with intend to cause psychological or economic harm shall
be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to both such fine
and such imprisonment.
164D Spam

			

Any person who intentionally and without lawful excuse—
(a) uses a protected computer system to relay or retransmit
multiple electronic mail messages, with the intent to deceive
or mislead recipients or any electronic mail or internet service
provider as to the origin of such messages; or
(b) materially falsifies header information in multiple electronic
mail messages and initiates the transmission of such
messages;

shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 5 or
to imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year or to both such fine
and such imprisonment.
164E Transmission of intimate images without consent

(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally by means of a
computer or information system makes available, broadcasts or distributes
a data message containing any intimate image or video of an identifiable
person without the consent of the person concerned or with recklessness as
to the lack of consent of the person concerned, with the aim of causing the
humiliation or embarrassment of such person shall be guilty of an offence
and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding five years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.”.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) “intimate image” means
a visual depiction of a person made by any means in which the person
is nude, the genitalia or naked female breasts are exposed or sexual acts
are displayed.
65

164F Production and dissemination of racist and xenophobic
material

			
Any person who unlawfully and intentionally through a computer
or information system—
(a) produces or causes to be produced racist or xenophobic
material for the purpose of its distribution;
(b) offers, makes available or broadcasts or causes to be offered,
made available or broadcast racist or xenophobic material;
(c) distributes or transmits or causes to be distributed or
transmitted racist or xenophobic material;
(d) uses language that tends to lower the reputation or feelings of
persons for the reason that they belong to a group of persons
distinguished on the grounds set out in section 56(3) of the
Constitution or any other grounds whatsoever, if used as a
pretext for any of these factors;
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 14
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years or to both such
fine and such imprisonment.
164G Identity-related offence

(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally by means of
information and communication technologies generates and sends any
data message to another person, or posts on any material whatsoever on
any electronic medium accessible by any person, with the intent to coerce,
intimidate, harass, threaten, bully or cause substantial emotional distress,
or to degrade, humiliate or demean the person of another or to encourage
a person to harm himself or herself, shall be guilty of an offence and
liable to a fine not exceeding level 10 or to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and such imprisonment
               

(2) Special consideration shall be given when a child is found guilty
of any of the offences set out in (1), in line with the law of Zimbabwe:

		
Provided that the penalty shall not give the child a criminal record
nor shall the child be imprisoned for this offence.”.
PART III

Offences Against Children and Procedural Law
165

Recording of genitalia and buttocks beneath closing without
consent

(1) Any person who unlawfully and intentionally records an
image or video beneath the clothing of another person which depicts
this person’s genitalia or buttocks, whether covered by underwear or not,
without the consent of the depicted person or with recklessness as to the
lack of consent of the person concerned, as far as these are to be protected
against sight according to the recognizable will of the depicted person,
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 10
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to both such
fine and such imprisonment.

                                  (2) Section 164E shall apply mutatis mutandis to any person who
makes available, broadcasts or distributes a data message containing an
image or video as described in (1).”.
66

165A Child sexual abuse material
(1)  In this Act—
“Child sexual abuse material” means any representation through
publication, exhibition, cinematography, electronic means
or any other means whatsoever, of a child, a person made to
appear as a child or realistic material representing a child,
engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activity, or any
representation of the sexual parts of a child for primarily
sexual purposes.
(2)Any person who unlawfully and intentionally, through a
computer or information system—
(a)

produces child sexual abuse material;

(c)

distributes or transmits child sexual abuse material;

(e)

possesses child sexual abuse material on a computer system
or a computer-data storage medium;

(b) offers or makes available child sexual abuse material;
(d) procures or obtains child sexual abuse material for oneself
or for another person;

(f)

knowingly obtains, accesses or procures child sexual abuse
material;

(g) baits a child into the production or distribution of child
sexual abuse material;

shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 14 or
to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years, or both such fine
and such imprisonment.
(3)   Any person of 18 years or above, who unlawfully and
intentionally through information and communication technologies,
proposes to meet a child who has not reached the age of consent to
sexual activity as set by the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform Act)
[Chapter 9:23] for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity with him
or her, where this proposal has been followed by material acts leading
to such a meeting, shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not
exceeding level 14 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten
years, or both such fine and such imprisonment.”.
165B

Exposing children to pornography

			
Any person who unlawfully and intentionally through a computer
or information system—
(a) makes pornographic material available to any child; or
(b) facilitates access by any child to pornography or displays
pornographic material to any child;

with or without the intention of lowering the child’s inhibitions
in relation to sexual activity or inducing the child to have sexual
relations with that person;

shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 14
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to both such
fine and such imprisonment.
67
Jurisdiction

(1) A court in Zimbabwe shall have jurisdiction to try any offence
under this Act where the offence was committed wholly or in part—
(a) within Zimbabwe or by any person in or outside Zimbabwe
using a computer or information system or device, software
or data located in Zimbabwe; or
(b) on a ship or aircraft registered in Zimbabwe; or
(c) by a national or permanent resident of Zimbabwe or a
person carrying on business in Zimbabwe, whether or not
the offence is committed in Zimbabwe; or
(d) by a national or permanent resident of Zimbabwe or a
person carrying on business in Zimbabwe and the offence is
committed outside Zimbabwe, if the person’s conduct also
constitutes an offence under the law of the country where
the offence was committed and harmful effects were caused
in Zimbabwe; or
(e) by any person, regardless of the location, nationality or
citizenship of the person—
(i) using a computer or information system or device,
software, or data located within Zimbabwe; or
(ii) directed against a computer or information system or
device, software or data located in Zimbabwe;
(f)

36

against citizens or permanent residents of Zimbabwe.”.

Amendment of Cap. 9:07

The Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act [Chapter 9:07] is amended by the
insertion after Part XX of the following Part—
“PART XXA
Provisions Relating to Cyber Crime
379A Search and seizure
(1) In this section “seize” includes—

(a)

taking possession of or securing a computer;

(c)

taking a printout or output of computer data;

(e)

activating any onsite computer system or computer data
storage media;

(b) securing a computer system or part thereof or a computer-data
storage medium;
(d) making and retaining a copy of computer data, including
through the use of use of onsite equipment;

(f)

maintaining the integrity of any stored relevant computer
data;

(g) rendering inaccessible or removing computer data in the
accessed computer system.

(2) A magistrate may, on an application by a police officer
in the prescribed form, that specified computer data or a printout or
68

other information is reasonably required for the purpose of a criminal
investigation or criminal proceedings, order that—
(a)

a person in Zimbabwe in control of the relevant computer
system produce from the system specified computer data
or a printout or other intelligible output of that data; or

(b) an electronic communications service provider in Zimbabwe
produce information about persons who subscribe to or
otherwise use the service.
(3) An application referred to in subsection (1) shall be supported
by an affidavit in which the police officer shall set out the offence being
investigated, the computer system in which it is suspected to be stored,
the reasonable grounds upon which the belief is based, the measures that
will be taken in pursuance of the investigation and the period over which
those measures will be taken.
may—

(4) A police officer granted a warrant in terms of this section
(a)

if there are reasonable grounds to believe that computer
data concerned is susceptible to loss, alteration, deletion,
impairment or modification, by written notice given to a
person in control of the computer data, require the person
in control of the data to ensure that the data specified in the
notice is preserved for a period not exceeding seven days
as may be specified in the notice which period may be
extended, on an application to a magistrate, for such period
as the magistrate may grant;

(b) by written notice to a person in control of the computer
system or information system concerned, require the person
in control thereof to disclose relevant traffic data concerning
specified communications in order to identify—
(i)

the service providers; or

(ii) the path through which the communication was
transmitted.
(5) Any person who does not comply with the order given in
terms of this section shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine.
379B Expedited preservation
(1) A magistrate may, on an application by a police officer in the
prescribed form, that there are reasonable grounds to suspect or believe
that traffic data associated with a specified communication is required
for the purposes of a criminal investigation—
(a)

order any person in control of such data to—
(i)

(ii)

collect, record or preserve the traffic data associated
with a specified communication during a specified
period; or

permit and assist a specified police officer to collect
or record that data.

(b) authorise the police officer to collect or record traffic data
associated with a specified communication during a specified
69

period through the use of any appropriate technological
means.
(2) Section 33(3) of the Data Protection Act [Chapter 11:22] shall
apply mutatis mutandis to an application in terms of this section.
379C Obligations and immunity of service providers
(1) An electronic communications network or access service
provider shall not be criminally liable for providing access or transmitting
information through its system if such service provider has not—
(a)

initiated the transmission; or

(c)

selected or modified the information contained in the
transmission.

(b) selected the receiver of the transmission; or

(2) The provision of access or the transmission referred to in
subsection (1) shall include the automatic, intermediate and transient
storage of the information transmitted in so far as this takes place for
the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission in the communication
network, and the information is not stored for any period longer than is
reasonably necessary for the transmission.
(3) A hosting provider shall not be criminally liable for the
information stored at the request of a user of the service if the hosting
provider—
(a)

promptly removes or disables access to the information after
receiving an order from any court of law to remove specific
stored illegal information; or

(b) in any other manner, obtains knowledge or becomes aware
of any illegal information stored, promptly informs the
appropriate authority to enable it to evaluate the nature
of the information and if necessary, issue an order for its
removal.
(4) Subsection (3) shall not apply where the user of the service
is acting under the authority or the control of the hosting provider.
(5) Where the hosting provider removes the content after receiving
an order pursuant to sub-section (3), no liability shall arise from the
contractual obligations with the user with regard to the availability of
the service.
(6) A hosting provider who fails to remove or disable access to
information in terms of subsection (3) shall be guilty of an offence and
liable to a fine not exceeding level 8 or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(7) A caching provider shall not be criminally liable for the
automatic, intermediate or temporary storage of information where
the caching was performed for the sole purpose of making the onward
transmission of the information to other users of the service upon their
request more efficient if the caching provider—
(a)

does not modify the information;

(b) complies with conditions of access to the information;
70

complies with rules regarding the updating of the information,
specified in a manner widely recognised and used by industry;

(d) does not interfere with the lawful use of technology, widely
recognised and used by industry, to obtain data on the use
of the information; and
(e)

acts promptly to remove or to disable access to the information
it has stored upon obtaining knowledge that the information
has been removed from the network at the initial source of
the transmission, or that access to it has been disabled, or
that a court or an appropriate public authority has ordered
such removal or disablement.

(8) A caching provider who contravenes the conditions set out
in subsection (7) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 8 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years
or to both such fine and such imprisonment.
(9) An internet service provider who enables access to information
provided by a third person by providing an electronic hyperlink shall not
be criminally liable with respect to the information if the internet service
provider—
(a)

promptly removes or disables access to the information after
receiving an order from an appropriate public authority or
court to remove the link; or

(b) through other means, obtains knowledge or becomes aware
of stored specific illegal information promptly informs the
appropriate authority to enable it to evaluate the nature of the
information and if necessary issue an order for its removal.
(10) An internet service provider who fails to promptly remove or
disable access to information in terms of subsection (9) shall be guilty of
an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 8 or to imprisonment for
a period not exceeding two years or both such fine and such imprisonment.
(11) Any service provider who knowingly enables access to, stores,
transmits or provides an electronic hyperlink to, any information with
knowledge of the unlawfulness of the content of any such information
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 14 or
to imprisonment not exceeding a period of ten years or to both such fine
and such imprisonment.
379D Jurisdiction
(1) A court in Zimbabwe shall have jurisdiction to try any offence
under this Act where the offence was committed wholly or in part—
(a)

within Zimbabwe or by any person in or outside Zimbabwe
using a computer or information system or device, software
or data located in Zimbabwe; or

(b) on a ship or aircraft registered in Zimbabwe; or
(c)

by a national or permanent resident of Zimbabwe or   a
person carrying on business in Zimbabwe, whether or not
the offence is committed in Zimbabwe; or

(d) by a national or permanent resident of Zimbabwe   or   a
person carrying on business in Zimbabwe and the offence is
71

committed outside Zimbabwe, if the person’s conduct also
constitutes an offence under the law of the country where
the offence was committed and harmful effects were caused
in Zimbabwe; or

by any person, regardless of the location, nationality or
citizenship of the person—
(i) using a computer or information system or device,
software, or data located within Zimbabwe; or directed
against a computer or information system or
(ii) device, software or data located in Zimbabwe.

379E Admissibility of electronic evidence
(1) In any criminal proceedings for an offence in terms of this Act,
evidence generated from a computer system or by means of information
and communications technologies or electronic communications systems
shall be admissible in court.
(2) In assessing the admissibility or evidential weight of the
evidence, regard shall be given to—
(a)

the reliability of the manner in which the evidence was
generated, stored or communicated;

(b) the integrity of the manner in which the evidence was
maintained;

(c)

the manner in which the originator or recipient of the evidence
was identified; and

(d) any other relevant factors.

(3) The authentication of electronically generated documents
shall be as prescribed in rules of evidence regulating the integrity and
correctness of any other documents presented as evidence in a court of
law.
		
(4) This section shall apply in addition to and not in substitution
of any other law in terms of which evidence generated by computer
systems or information and communications technologies or electronic
communications systems or devices may be admissible in evidence.
379F Forfeiture

			
A court convicting any person of an offence under this Act may
order the forfeiture to the State of—
(a) any money, asset or property constituting or traceable to the
gross proceeds of such offence; and
(b) any computer or information system, software or other
devices used or intended to be used to commit or to facilitate
the commission of such offence.”.
37

Amendment of Cap.11:20

(1) The Interception of Communications Act [Chapter 11:20] (hereinafter called
the “principal Act”) is amended in section 2—
(a) by the repeal of the definition of “monitoring centre” and substitution
of—
72
““cyber security and monitoring centre” means the Cyber Security and
Monitoring of Interception of Communications Centre being unit
central monitoring apparatus designated to be the monitoring
facility through which all the intercepted communications and
call-related information of a particular interception target are
forwarded to an authorised person;”.
(2) The principal Act is amended in by the repeal of section 4 and the following
is substituted—
“4

Cyber Security and Monitoring of Interceptions of
Communications Centre

		
(1) There shall be established a unit in the Office of the President,
which shall be called the Cyber Security and Monitoring of Interception
of Communications Centre.
(2) The cyber security and monitoring centre shall be advised
by a committee which shall give advice to the director of the centre on
whether or not a warrant should be issued.
(3) The cyber security and monitoring centre shall be manned,
controlled and operated by technical experts designated by the agency.
(4) The cyber security and monitoring centre shall give technical
advice to—
(a) authorised persons; and
(b) service providers;
on cyber security and the interception of communications in terms of this
Act.”.
(3) The principal Act is amended by the insertion after section 4 of the following
sections—
“4A Functions of Cyber Security and Monitoring of Interceptions
of Communications Centre
			
The functions of the Cyber Security and Monitoring Centre shall
be to—
(a)

be the sole facility through which authorised interceptions
shall be effected;

(b) advise Government and implement Government policy on
cybercrime and cyber security;

(c)

identify areas for intervention to prevent cybercrime;

(e)

establish and operate a protection-assured whistle-blower
system that will enable members of the public to confidentially
report to the Committee cases of alleged cybercrime;

(d) coordinate cyber security and establish a national contact
point available daily around-the-clock;

(f)

promote and coordinate activities focused on improving
cyber security and preventing cybercrime by all interested
parties in the public and private sectors;

(g) provide guidelines to public and private sector interested
parties on matters relating to awareness, training,
73

enhancement, investigation, prosecution and combating
cybercrime and managing cyber security threats;

(h) oversee the enforcement of the Act to ensure that it is
enforced reasonably and with due regard to fundamental
human rights and freedoms;
(i)
(j)

provide technical and policy advice to the Minister;

advise the Minister on the establishment and development of
a comprehensive legal framework governing cyber security
matters.

4B Establishment of Cybersecurity Committee
(1) There is hereby established a committee to be known as the
Cybersecurity Committee which will shall be an ad hoc advisory body
to the Minister.
(2) The Cyber Security Committee shall consist of eleven
members appointed by the Minister for their knowledge in computer and
telecommunications, law and policy and skills in respect of any aspect
dealt with in this Act as follows—
(a)

one representative nominated by each of the following—
(i) the Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory
Authority of Zimbabwe;
(ii) the ministry responsible for information and
communications technologies;
(ii) the ministry responsible for science and technology;
(iii) the ministry responsible for justice;
(iv) the Zimbabwe Republic Police;
(v) the National Prosecution Authority;
(vi) the ministry responsible for defence;
(vii) the Central Intelligence Organisation;
(viii) the Prisons and Correctional Service;

(b) one representative from the cyber security and monitoring
centre;
(c)

any representative from any sector of the economy or any
other person who may be necessary to the deliberations in
respect of a particular warrant, appointed on an ad hoc basis.

(3) From among the appointed members, the Minister shall appoint
the Chairperson of the Cybersecurity Committee.
(4) The Committee shall, at its first meeting, elect a ViceChairperson of the Board from among its members:
		
Provided that the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson shall be
of different genders.
(5) The provisions of the Schedule apply to the Cybersecurity
Committee.
(6) The Cyber Security Committee may, with the approval of the
Minister, issue such guidelines as may be necessary for the carrying out
of the provisions of this Act as it relates to its functions under this Act.”.
74

(4) The principal Act is amended in section 5 by the insertion after subsection
(3) of the following subsection—

“(4) The Minister, upon receiving an application for a warrant in terms of this
section, shall refer the application to the Cyber security committee, who shall advise
the Minister on whether or not any of the reasonable grounds to issue a warrant
referred to in section 6 are present:

		
Provided that the Minister may issue a provisional warrant if in his or her
opinion any of the reasonable grounds referred to in section 6 are present.
(5) The Minister may withdraw a warrant issued provisionally upon the
advice of the Committee that no reasonable grounds to issue to the warrant existed,
without prejudice to anything that may be done by virtue of the warrant issued by
the Minister between the time he or she issued it provisionally and the time it was
referred to the committee and withdrawn.”.
(5) The principal Act is amended by the insertion of the following Schedule —
“SCHEDULE (Section 4B (5))
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO CYBERSECURITY COMMITTEE
Terms and conditions of office of members
1. (1) Subject to this Schedule, a member shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding five years, as the Minister may fix on his or her appointment.
(2) Subject to paragraph 8, a member shall hold office on such conditions
as the Minister may fix in relation to members generally.
(3) A retiring member shall be eligible for re-appointment as a member.
Disqualification for appointment as member
2. (1) The Minister shall not appoint a person as a member and no person shall
be qualified to hold office as a member if he or she—
(a)

is married to a person who is engaged in any activity connected with
any business, if in the opinion of the Minister such financial interest
or activity is likely to interfere with the impartial discharge by that
person of his or her duties as a member; or

(b) has, in terms of a law in force in any country—
(i) been adjudged or otherwise declared insolvent or bankrupt and
has not been rehabilitated or discharged; or
(ii) made an assignment to, or arrangement or composition with, his
or her creditors which has not been rescinded or set aside; or
(c) has, within the period of five years immediately preceding the date of
his or her proposed appointment, been convicted—
(i) in Zimbabwe, of an offence; or
(ii) outside Zimbabwe, in respect of conduct which if committed in
Zimbabwe would constitute an offence; and sentenced to a term
of imprisonment imposed without the option of a fine, whether
or not any portion has been suspended, and has not received a
free pardon.
(2) A person who is—

(a)

a member of Parliament; or

(b) a member of two or more other statutory bodies;
75

shall not be appointed as a member, nor shall he or she be qualified to hold
office as a member.
(3) For the purpose of subparagraph (2)(b)—
(a) a person who is appointed to a council, board or other authority which
is a statutory body or which is responsible for the administration of
the affairs of a statutory body, shall be regarded as a member of that
statutory body;
(b) “statutory body” means—
(i) any Commission established by the Constitution; or
(ii) any body corporate established-directly by or under an Act for
special purposes specified in that Act, the membership of which
consists wholly or mainly of persons appointed by the President,
Vice President, a Minister or a statutory body or by a Commission
established by the Constitution.
Vacation of office by member
3. A member shall vacate his or her office and the member’s office shall become
vacant—
(a) one month after the date upon which he or she gives notice in writing
to the Minister of his or her intention to resign or on the expiry of such
other period of notice as the member and the Minister may agree; or
(b) on the date he or she begins to serve a sentence of imprisonment
imposed in Zimbabwe without the option of a fine—
(i) in Zimbabwe, in respect of an offence; or
(ii) outside Zimbabwe, in respect of conduct which if committed in
Zimbabwe, would constitute an offence; or
(c) if he or she becomes disqualified in terms of paragraph 2(1)(a), (b) or
(c) to hold office as a member; or
(d) if he or she is required in terms of paragraph 4 to vacate his or her
office.
Dismissal or suspension of members
4 (1) The Minister may require a member to vacate his or her office if the
member—
(a)

has been guilty of any conduct that renders him or her unsuitable as a
member; or

(b) has failed to comply with the conditions of his or her office fixed by
the Minister in terms of paragraph 1(2); or
(c)

is mentally or physically incapable of efficiently carrying out his or
her functions as a member.

(2) The Minister, on the recommendation of the Committee, may require
a member to vacate his or her office if the member has been absent without the
permission of the Committee from two consecutive meetings of the Committee of
which he or she was given at least seven days’ notice and there was no just cause
for the member’s absence.
(3) The Minister may suspend a member—

(a)

whom he or she suspects on reasonable grounds of having been guilty
of conduct referred to in subparagraph (1)(a); or

(b) against whom criminal proceedings have been instituted for an offence
in respect of which a sentence of imprisonment without the option of
76

a fine may be imposed; and while that member is so suspended he or
she shall not carry out any functions as a member.
Filling of vacancies in Committee
5. On the death of or the vacation of office by a member the Minister shall
appoint a person to fill the vacancy.
Meetings and procedure of Committee
6 (1) The Cybersecurity Committee shall hold its meetings on an ad hoc basis
on such date and at such place as the Minister may fix.
(2) The chairperson or, in his or her absence, the vice-chairperson shall
preside at all meetings of the Committee:
		
Provided that, if the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent from
a meeting of the Committee, the members present may elect one of their members
to preside at that meeting as chairperson.
(3) Five members shall form a quorum at any meeting of the Committee.
(4) All acts, matters or things authorised or required to be done by the
Committee may be decided by a majority vote at a meeting of the Committee at
which a quorum is present.
(5) Subject to subparagraph (9), at all meetings of the Committee each
member present shall have one vote on each question before the Committee and, in
the event of an equality of votes, the chairperson shall have a casting vote in addition
to a deliberative vote.
Validity of decisions and acts of Committee
		 7. No decision or act of the Committee or act done under the authority of the
Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the fact that a disqualified person acted
as a member of the Committee at the time the decision was taken or act was done
or authorised.
Minutes of proceedings of Committee and committees
8. (1) The Committee shall cause minutes of all proceedings of and decisions
taken at every meeting of the Committee to be entered in books kept for the purpose
in a confidential manner.”.
77