
     Law No. 1.165 of December 23, 1993 on the protection of personal information


     Chapter I - Automated processing of personal information

     Section I - Principles and definitions
     Title replaced from April 2009 the law of December 2008 count 1st n° 1.353 4 by


     Article 1
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Automated or non-automated processing of personal information must not infringe the fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in
     Title III of the Constitution.
     Nominative information, in any form whatsoever, is that which makes it possible to identify a specific or determinable natural
     person. A person who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one
     or more specific elements, specific to his physical, physiological, psychological, economic, cultural or social identity, is deemed
     to be determinable.
     The processing of personal information is any operation or set of operations relating to such information, regardless of the
     process used. These relate to the collection, recording, organization, modification, storage, extraction, consultation or
     destruction of information, as well as the use, interconnection or reconciliation, communication of information by transmission,
     dissemination or any other form of making available.


     The controller is the natural or legal person, governed by private or public law, the public authority, the service or any other body which
     determines, alone or jointly with others, the purpose and means of the processing and which decide on its implementation.


     The recipient of the processing is the natural or legal person, governed by private or public law, the public authority, the service or any
     other body which receives the communication of data, other than the data subject, the controller, the subcontractor. processor and the
     persons who, placed under the direct authority of the controller or processor, are authorized to process the data.


     The person concerned by the processing of personal information is the person to whom the information that is the subject of the
     processing relates.

     Section II - The personal information control authority

     Title replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December4, 2008 counted by


     Section 2
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     A control authority called the nominative information control commission has been created, whose mission is to control and verify
     compliance with the legislative and regulatory provisions relating to the protection of personal information. This commission
     is responsible, in complete independence, under the conditions determined by this law:


          1°) to receive the declaration of implementation of processing by natural persons or persons
             morals of private law provided for in Article 6;
          2°) to give a reasoned opinion when processing must be carried out by the persons referred to in Article 7
             ;
          3°) to give a reasoned opinion when the purpose of processing is to carry out research in the field of health, under the conditions
             provided for in the first paragraph of Article 7-1; 4°) to authorize the automated
          processing implemented within the framework of Article 11-1; 5°) to authorize the transfer of
          personal information to countries or organizations that do not ensure a level of
             adequate protection, provided that the data controller, or his representatives, offer sufficient guarantees to ensure respect for
            the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subjects as well as the exercise of the corresponding rights
            by the recipients concerned;
          6°) establishing and updating the directory of automated processing referred to in Article 10; 7°) to
          control, under the conditions defined by this law, the operation of automated processing, to investigate complaints and
            petitions addressed to it, as well as requests for verification of information to which interested persons cannot have
            access directly;
          8°) to report to the public prosecutor the facts constituting offenses of which it becomes aware in the exercise of
             his missions ;

          9°) to propose to the competent authorities the provisions to be enacted in order to fix either general measures
             suitable for ensuring the control and security of processing, or special or circumstantial measures including, exceptionally, the
             destruction of information media;
          10°) to formulate all recommendations falling within the scope of the missions conferred on it by law; 11°) to inform the persons
          concerned of the rights and obligations resulting from this law, in particular by communicating on request to any person, or by
            publishing, if the commission deems it useful for informing the public, of its deliberations, opinions or recommendations
            of a general nature, except when such communication or publication would be likely to undermine public security or the respect
            due to private and family life;


          12°) issue warnings or formal notices to the address of a data controller, for the purposes and under the conditions provided for by
            this law;
          13°) to be a party to legal proceedings for the purposes and under the conditions provided for
          by this law; 14°) to make all public reports on the application of this law and the texts adopted for its application; an annual activity
             report of the commission is submitted to the Minister of State and to the President of the National Council; this report is published.


     The commission is consulted by the Minister of State during the development of legislative or regulatory measures relating to the
     protection of the rights and freedoms of individuals with regard to the processing of personal information and may be consulted for any other
     measure likely to affect those rights and freedoms.


     Section 3
     Replaced from April 2009 the law n° 1.353 of December2008 counting 1st 4 by
     Any natural or legal person whose rights conferred by this law or the texts taken for its application have been disregarded, or those having
     reason to presume that these rights have been disregarded, may refer the matter to the chairman of the commission for the control of personal
     information. , for the purposes, where appropriate, of implementing the measures provided for in Chapter III.



     Section 4
     Replaced on April 1, 2009, Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008, amended OrdinanceNo. 7.774 of 8 count by; by November2019


     The commission is composed of six members proposed, because of their competence, as follows:

          1°) one member by the National Council; 2°)
          one member by the Council of State; 3°)
          one member by the Minister of State; 4°) a
          member having the status of magistrate by the director of judicial services; 5°) one member by the
          Communal Council; 6°) one member by the
          Economic, Social and Environmental Council.

     The proposals are made outside the authorities, councils and institutions concerned and according to the procedures set by sovereign
     order.


     Section 5
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     The members of the nominative information control commission are appointed by a sovereign order for a period of five years, renewable
     once. The commission elects from among its members, by absolute majority, a chairman and a vice-chairman.


     In the exercise of their powers, the members of the commission do not receive instructions from any authority.
     Except resignation or impediment, it cannot be put an end to the functions of a member of the commission.
     The chairman's vote is decisive in the event of a tie vote. The other operating rules of the [2] commission are set by sovereign
     order                                                            .


     Section 5-1
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     The members of the commission as well as any person whose assistance it secures are bound by professional secrecy under
     the conditions provided for in article 308 of the penal code. They are also bound by the obligation of secrecy for all matters relating to the
     facts and information of which they become aware in the performance of their duties.

     Section 5-2
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     The commission has departments headed by the president and placed under his authority. The services of the commission include the
     secretary general and the staff of the secretariat.
     The secretary general is responsible for the operation and coordination of the services.


     Section 5-3
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     Except for specific legal or regulatory provisions, the staff of the commission are subject to the general rules applicable to civil
     servants and agents of the State.
     However, hierarchical and disciplinary powers are exercised over them by the chairman of the commission.


     Section 5-4
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     The appropriations necessary for the functioning of the commission for the control of personal information are entered in
     a specific chapter of the state budget.
     Within the framework of the preparation of the preliminary or amending draft budget of the State, the president of the commission for
     the control of nominative information sends to the Minister of State the proposals concerning income and expenditure.


     Expenses are authorized by the President or the Secretary General. The commission's accounts must be audited annually under the
     conditions set by sovereign order.


     Section 5-5
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     The chairman of the commission concludes all contracts necessary for the proper functioning of his services.


     Section 5-6
     Created in April 2009 the law n ° 1.353 of December 4, 2008 count 1st by

     In the event of absence or impediment of the president, his replacement is ensured by the vice-president.


     Section III - Implementation of processing


     Section 6
     Replaced from April 2009 the law n° 1.353 of December4, 2008 counting1st by
     With the exception of those covered by the provisions of Articles 7, 7-1 and 11-1, the automated processing of personal information,
     implemented by data controllers, natural or legal persons under private law, is the object of a declaration to the chairman of the nominative
     information control commission. The declaration includes the commitment that the processing meets the requirements of the
     law. The chairman of the nominative information control commission issues a receipt. Receipt of the receipt allows processing to be
     implemented without exonerating the declaring data controller from liability.

                                                                        [3]
     However, standards may be enacted by ministerial order taken on the proposal or after the opinion of the commission for the control of
     personal information, setting the characteristics to which the determined categories of processing must comply which clearly do
     not involve any infringement of fundamental rights and freedoms. This processing may be the subject of a simplified declaration of
     conformity, or be exempt from any obligation to [4] declare, under the conditions provided for by the aforementioned ministerial order.



     Section 7
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     The implementation of automated processing of personal information by data controllers, legal persons governed by public law,
     public authorities, private law bodies entrusted with a mission of general interest or concessionaires of a public service included on a list
     established by ministerial decree, is decided by the authorities or by the competent bodies after reasoned opinion of the commission for the
     control of personal information.


     This decision and the reasoned opinion that accompanies it are published in the under the conditions of the sovereign order. With regard to
     the processing referred to in Article 11, only the meaning of the opinion of the commission and the decision of the competent authority or
     body are published.
     If the opinion of the commission is unfavorable, the competent authority or body may only implement the processing after having been
     authorized to do so by reasoned order of the Minister of State or the director of judicial services.
     Before April 1 of each year, a general list of the processing carried out by the persons referred to in the first [5] paragraph is published by
     ministerial order.                               


     Section 7-1[6]
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     Data controllers, natural or legal persons, may only implement automated processing of personal information for the purpose of
     research in the field of health after a reasoned opinion from the personal information control commission. Prior to the delivery of this opinion,
     the latter may, under conditions set by sovereign order, consult a competent public service in the field of health. This consultation suspends
     the time allowed for the commission for the control of personal information to issue its opinion.


     If the committee's opinion is unfavourable, the data controller may only implement it after having been authorized to do so by reasoned
     ministerial order.
     These provisions do not apply to data controllers acting in the context of biomedical research as defined in Law No. 1.265 of 23
     December 2002 relating to the protection of individuals in biomedical research. The processing implemented in this context remains subject,
     as the case may be, to the provisions of Articles 6 or 7.


     In all cases, the file produced in support of the request for an opinion or the declaration must include, in addition to the elements
     provided for in Article 8, mention of the objective of the research, the population concerned , the method of observation or
     investigation chosen, the justification for using the personal information processed, the duration and methods of organizing the research, the
     method of data analysis, as well as, if where applicable, the opinion issued by the advisory committee on ethics in the field of biomedical
     research instituted by law n° 1.265 of December 23, 2002. The commission for the control of personal information is bound by the terms of
     this opinion.

     Section 7-2
     Created in April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by

     The nominative information control commission, seized within the framework of articles 7 and 7-1, makes a decision within two months of
     receipt of the complete file. This period may be renewed once for an identical period on the reasoned decision of the president.


     The opinion requested from the commission, which is not given at the end of the period provided for in the preceding paragraph, renewed if
     necessary, is deemed to be favourable.

     Section 8

     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     Declarations, requests for advice and requests for authorization addressed to the commission for the control of personal information must, to
     be admissible, include the following information:

          1°) the identity of the signatory as well as that of the data controller and, where applicable, that of his representative at
             Monaco which makes the declaration, the request for an opinion or the request for authorisation; 2°)
          the functionalities, the purpose, the justification within the meaning of Article 10-2, and if applicable the name of the processing; 3°) the
          name of the service or the identity of the persons in charge of its operation and the measures taken to allow the exercise of the right of
            access to information;
          4°) the categories of persons who, because of their functions, have access to the information; 

5°) the
          categories of information and the information subject to the processing, their origin, the duration of their storage, the categories of persons
             concerned by the processing and the categories of recipients authorized to receive communication of the information;


          6°) reconciliations, interconnections or any other forms of linking information as well as their transfers to third parties;


          7°) the measures taken to ensure the security of processing and information and the guarantee of protected secrets
             by the law ;
          8°) the indication, where applicable, that the processing is intended for the communication of information abroad, even
             in the event that it is carried out from operations previously carried out outside Monaco.

     Section 9
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Any modification occurring in one of the elements set out in the previous article must be the subject, as the case may be, of a declaration, a
     request for an opinion or a request for authorisation.

     The personal information control commission is notified of the deletion of the processing.
     Unless otherwise provided by law, information must not be kept in nominative form beyond the duration provided for in the request for opinion,
     declaration or authorization request, except with a view to being processed for historical, statistical or scientific. However, the committee may:
             set a shorter retention period than that provided for in the declaration, the request for an opinion or the request for authorisation;
             authorize the

             storage beyond the duration provided for in the declaration, the request for an opinion or the request for authorization.



     Section IV - List of treatments

     Section 10
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     The processing directory includes:

          1°) the date of the declaration, the request for an opinion or the request for authorization relating to the implementation of a
             treatment ;

          2°) the information given on the declaration, on the request for an opinion or on the request for authorization, with the exception of the
             measures taken to ensure the security of the processing and information, as well as the name of the service or the the identity
             of the persons in charge of its operation;
          3°) the date of issue of the receipt for the declaration, the date of the notice or that of the authorisation; 4°) the dates
          and wording of the changes made to the information referred to in point 2° above; 5°) the date of cancellation of the
          processing and that, where applicable, of the cancellation of the registration.

     The directory can be consulted by any natural or legal person.
     The automated processing operations referred to in Article 11 are not registered in the directory


     Chapter II - Personal information

     Section I - Principles relating to the quality of personal information and
     conditions of lawfulness of processing

     Title replaced from April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by


     Section 10-1
     Created in April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Personal information must be:

             collected and processed fairly and lawfully; collected
             for a specific, explicit and legitimate purpose, and not further processed in a manner incompatible with that purpose; adequate,
             relevant and not excessive in relation
             to the purpose for which they are collected and for which they are further processed; accurate and, if necessary, updated; all
             reasonable measures must be taken to ensure that
             data which is inaccurate or incomplete, with regard to the purpose for which it was collected or for which it is further processed, is
             erased or rectified;


             kept in a form allowing the identification of the persons concerned for a period not exceeding that necessary to achieve the purpose for
             which they are collected or for which they are subsequently processed.



     The controller or his representative must ensure compliance with these provisions.



     Section 10-2
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     Processing of personal information must be justified:

             by the consent of the person(s) concerned, or; by compliance with a
             legal obligation to which the controller or his representative is subject, or; for reasons of public interest, or; through the performance
             of a contract or pre-contractual
             measures with the data subject, or; by the achievement of a legitimate interest pursued by the controller or his
             representative or by the recipient, provided that the interest or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the person concerned are
             not disregarded.



     Section 11
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Can only be implemented by the judicial authorities and the administrative authorities, within the exclusive framework of the missions which
     are legally conferred on them, the processing, automated or not, with or without biometric data:

             of interest to public safety; relating to
             offences, convictions or security measures;
             having as their object the prevention, research, observation or prosecution of criminal offenses or the execution of criminal convictions
             or security measures


     Section 11-1
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     By way of derogation from the provisions of the previous article, data controllers other than judicial and administrative authorities may
     implement automated processing of personal information:

             relating to suspicions of illicit activities, offences, security measures; containing biometric data
             necessary to verify the identity of individuals;
             implemented for monitoring purposes.


     Said processing can however only be implemented with the prior authorization of the commission for the control of personal information when
     it is necessary for the pursuit of an essential legitimate objective and that the rights and freedoms mentioned in article 1 of the persons
     concerned are respected.
     The nominative information control commission makes a decision within two months of receipt of the complete file. This period may
     be renewed once for an identical period on the reasoned decision of the president.


     The authorization requested from the commission, which is not returned at the end of the period provided for in the preceding
     paragraph, renewed if necessary, is deemed favorable.


     Section 12
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     No one may carry out processing, whether automated or not, revealing, directly or indirectly, opinions or political, racial or ethnic, religious,
     philosophical or trade union affiliations, or even data relating to health, including data genetics, sexual life, mores, measures of a
     social nature.


     The provisions of the first paragraph do not apply in the following cases: when the person
     concerned has freely given his written and express consent, in particular within the framework of law n° 1.265 of December 23, 2002 relating
     to the protection of persons in the biomedical research, except where the law provides that the prohibition referred to in the first paragraph
     cannot be lifted with the consent of the person concerned.
     The latter may, at any time, revoke its consent and request that the person responsible or the user of the processing destroy or erase
     the information concerning it;

             when a reason of public interest justifies it, to the processing referred to in Article 7, the implementation of which is decided by the
             competent authorities or bodies after a reasoned opinion from the commission for the control of personal information;


             when the processing concerns the members of an ecclesial institution or of a political, religious, philosophical,
             humanitarian or trade union group, within the framework of the statutory or social object of the institution or group and
             for the needs of its operation, provided that the processing relates only to the members of this body or to persons having
             regular contact with it related to its purpose and that the information is not communicated to third parties without the consent of
             the persons concerned;


             where the processing is necessary for the purposes of preventive medicine, medical diagnosis, the administration
             of care, medication or the management of health and social welfare services, or in the interest of research and that the
             processing of this data is carried out by a health practitioner subject to professional secrecy or by another person also subject
             to an obligation of secrecy; when the processing relates to information clearly made public by the data
             subject; when the processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims or meets a legal
             obligation.



     Section 13
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     Every natural person has the right:

             to object, for legitimate reasons, to the processing of personal information concerning them , except in the case where it is
             implemented, within the exclusive framework of their missions of general interest, by the data controllers referred to in Article
             7; to access, under the conditions provided for in section II,
             the information concerning it, and to obtain that it be modified if necessary.


     Unless otherwise provided by law, the ascendant, the descendant up to the second degree, or the surviving spouse of a deceased
     person, may, if he proves an interest, exercise the rights provided for in the preceding paragraph, with regard to information
     about that person.
     Any legal person has the right:

             to object, for legitimate reasons, to the processing of personal information concerning it, or to object, with the agreement of its
             members, to the processing of personal information concerning them. the purpose of the processing, except in the case where
             it is implemented, within the exclusive framework of their missions of general interest, by the data controllers referred to in
             Article 7; to access, under the conditions provided for in section II, information
             concerning it or, with the agreement of its members, to access personal information concerning them, and to obtain that it
             be modified if there is place.


     The provisions of this article do not apply to the processing referred to in article 11.


     Section 14
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Persons from whom personal information is collected must be informed:

             the identity of the data controller and, where applicable, that of his representative in Monaco; the purpose of the
             processing;
             whether answers are mandatory or optional; the
             consequences for them of a failure to respond; the identity of
             the recipients or categories of recipients; their rights of opposition, access
             and rectification with respect to information concerning them; their right to oppose the use on behalf of third
             parties, or the communication to third parties of personal information concerning them for prospecting purposes, in particular
             commercial.

     When the personal information is not collected directly from the person concerned, the controller or his representative must
     provide him with the information provided for in the previous paragraph, unless the information of the person concerned has
     already been carried out, proves impossible, or involves disproportionate measures with regard to the interest of the
     process or if the collection or communication of information is expressly provided for by legislative or regulatory provisions.


     The provisions of this article do not apply to the processing referred to in article 11.

     Section 14-1
     Created in April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by

     Everyone has the right not to be subject to a decision producing legal effects concerning them or affecting them significantly, taken
     on the sole basis of automated processing of information intended to define their profile or to evaluate certain aspects of his personality.


     A person may, however, be subject to a decision mentioned in the previous paragraph if this decision:

             is taken in connection with the conclusion or execution of a contract, provided that the request for conclusion or execution of the
             contract, introduced by the data subject, has been satisfied or that appropriate measures, such as the possibility of
             presenting their point of view and having their request re-examined, guarantee the safeguard of their legitimate interest;
             or is authorized by legal or regulatory provisions which
             specify the measures guaranteeing the safeguard of the legitimate interest of the data subject.



     Section 14-2
     Created in April 2009 the law n ° 1.353 of December 4, 2008 count 1st by

     The use of electronic communications networks with a view to storing information or accessing information stored in the terminal
     equipment of a subscriber or user must be preceded by clear and complete information for the user. or the subscriber, on the
     purpose of the processing and on the means at his disposal to oppose it.


     Electronic communications networks are defined as transmission systems and, where applicable, switching or routing equipment
     as well as other resources which allow the routing of signals by cable, by radio, by optical means or by other electromagnetic means.


     It is prohibited to make access to a service available on an electronic communications network subject to the acceptance, by the
     subscriber or user concerned, of the processing of information stored in his terminal equipment, unless the storage or technical access
     are intended exclusively to carry out or facilitate the transmission of a communication by means of an electronic communications network, or
     are strictly necessary for the provision of a service expressly requested by the subscriber or user.



     Section 14-3
     Created the law of August modified the law of December n° 1.383 2 2011 n° 1.482 17 2019 by; by

     Except with the express consent of the person concerned, the personal information collected by trust service providers for the purposes
     of issuing and storing certificates linked to electronic signatures must be collected directly from the person concerned and cannot
     be processed only for the purposes for which they were collected.



     Section II - Access to information

     Section 15
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 amended by Law No. 1.454 of October 30, counting by; by 2017


     Any person proving his identity can obtain from the controller or his representative:

          1°) information relating at least to the purpose of the processing, the categories of information to which it relates and the recipients or
             categories of recipients to whom the information is communicated;
          2°) confirmation that information concerning it is, or is not, processed; 3°) communication
          of this information in a written form, not coded and in conformity with the content of the
              recordings; information concerning health may only be communicated by the data controller or his representative to the persons
              to whom it may be communicated pursuant to the provisions of the legislation relating to consent and information in medical matters
              and according to the methods that 'they foresee;.


          4°) information on the automated reasoning leading to the decision referred to in Article 14-1.

     Unless there are specific legislative provisions, the communication must be made within one month of receipt of the request. However, the
     chairman of the nominative information control commission may, after receiving a favorable opinion from the latter, grant response times or
     dispense with the obligation to respond to requests that are abusive by their number, their repetitive or systematic nature, the duly notified
     person concerned.


     Section 15-1
     Created modified
             in April the
                        thelaw
                             lawofn°December  modified the
                                     1.503 of December  23,law of counting
                                                             2020 by       1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 n° 1.462 28 June 2018 by; by ;


     The person concerned by nominative information contained in the processing operations mentioned in article 11 may submit a request to the
     nominative information control commission to verify said information.

     The chairman of the commission appoints the member having the status of magistrate or, in the event of his/her impediment, the member
     proposed by the Council of State, to carry out all the verifications and to have the necessary modifications made, if necessary. . The latter may
     be assisted by a duly commissioned and sworn official of the supervisory authority.


     The chairman of the committee informs the person concerned that the verifications have been carried out. In agreement with the data controller
     or his representative, he may bring to his attention any information whose communication does not jeopardize public security.


     The person concerned by nominative information contained in the processing referred to in the second paragraph of article 25 of law n° 1.362
     of August 3, 2009, as amended, may submit a request to the Commission for the Control of Nominative Information to verify said
     information. . This request is examined under the conditions provided for in the second paragraph.


     Personal information may be communicated to the applicant when the commission finds, in agreement with the Service d'Information et de
     Contrôle sur les Circuits Financiers, and after consulting the controller, that their communication is not likely to call into question the purpose of
     the processing of the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism or to reveal: - the existence of one of the declarations
     provided for in articles 36, 40 to 42 and 53 of law n ° 1.362 of
     August 3, 2009, modified ; - the action taken on one of the declarations referred to in the preceding indent; - requests for information or
     documents, as well as any exchange of information provided for in Article 50 of Law No. 1.362 of
     3 August 2009, as amended.


     When the communication of personal information is likely to call into question the purpose of the processing, the commission, seized by the
     applicant, informs him that the necessary checks have been carried out.


     Section 15-2
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December4, 2008 counting by

     The controller or his representative is required to take specific measures to:

          1°) automatically complete or modify information that is incomplete or erroneous when he becomes aware of their incompleteness or
             inaccuracy; 2°) automatically delete the information which
          would have been obtained by fraudulent, unfair or illicit means,
            when he becomes aware of these terms and conditions;
          3°) delete the nominative form of the information at the end of the retention period set in the declaration, the request for an opinion or the
             authorization request, or at the end of the period set by the commission, in accordance with l 9


     Section 16
     Amendedfrom April 1, 2009 to Law No. 1.353 of December4, 2008 counting by

     The interested party may demand that the information concerning him or her be rectified, completed, clarified, updated or deleted
     when it has proven to be inaccurate, incomplete, ambiguous, outdated or if its collection, recording, communication or storage is prohibited. .


     At his request, a copy of the recording of the amended information is delivered to him free of charge.
     If there has been communication to recipients, the modified information or its deletion must be notified to them, unless dispensation has
     been granted by the chairman of the commission for the control of personal information.


     Section III - Security and confidentiality of processing

     Section 17
     
     The controller or his representative is required to provide appropriate technical and organizational measures to protect personal
     information against accidental or unlawful destruction, accidental loss, alteration, dissemination or unauthorized access, in
     particular when the processing includes transmissions of information in a network, as well as against any other form of unlawful
     processing.
     The measures implemented must ensure an adequate level of security with regard to the risks presented by the processing and the
     nature of the data to be protected.
     When the data controller or his representative uses the services of one or more service providers, he must ensure that the latter are able
     to meet the obligations prescribed in the two preceding paragraphs.
     The carrying out of processing by a service provider must be governed by a written contract between the service provider and the controller
     or his representative which stipulates in particular that the service provider and the members of his staff act only on the sole instruction of the
     controller or of his representative and that the obligations referred to in the first two paragraphs of this article are also incumbent on him.


     If the service provider wishes to use the services of one or more subcontractors for the performance of all or part of the services provided for
     in the aforementioned contract, the provisions of the preceding paragraph apply to the latter.


     Section 17-1
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     When processing is carried out pursuant to Articles 11 and 11-1, the processing manager also takes special technical and organizational
     measures intended to guarantee data protection. The list of measures likely to be taken to this end is set by sovereign order.


     These measures tend in particular to determine by name the list of authorized persons who alone have access, for the strict purposes of
     carrying out their missions, to the premises and installations used for processing, as well as to the information processed.


     The controller also ensures that the recipients to whom the processed information is transmitted can be clearly identified.

     Chapter III - Control of the regularity of processing
     Title replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counted by


     Section 18
 

     The Commission for the Control of Personal Information carries out the verifications and investigations necessary for the control of the
     implementation of the processing either by its members, or by agents of its secretariat, or by investigators appointed by the President on a
     proposal from the Commission and subject to the obligations prescribed in Article 5-1. Agents and investigators are commissioned and
     sworn for this purpose.
     The agents or investigators mentioned in the preceding paragraph must be in possession of a mission letter from the President of the Personal
     Information Control Commission expressly specifying the name and address of the natural or legal person concerned, as well as the purpose
     of the the mission.
     Control operations can only be carried out between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. or, outside these hours, when public access is authorized or
     when an activity is in progress.
     During the said operations, the agents or the investigators can carry out all the necessary checks, consult any processing, request
     communication, whatever the medium, or take a copy, by any means, or of any professional document and collect, from any competent
     person, the information relevant to their mission. They can access computer programs and information and request their transcription, by any
     appropriate processing, into documents that can be used directly for control purposes.


     However, only a doctor designated by the Chairman of the Commission for the Control of Nominative Information from among the doctors
     appearing on a list drawn up by the Council of the Order of Physicians of Monaco and containing at least five names can request the
     communication of medical information. included in a treatment necessary for the purposes of preventive medicine, medical research, medical
     diagnosis, the administration of care or treatment or the management of health services, and which is implemented by a member of a health
     profession. The doctor thus appointed transmits to the Commission for the Control of Nominative Information only the information necessary
     for the purposes of the control without mentioning, in any way, the individual medical information to which he had access.



     As part of the Commission's monitoring mission, the people questioned are required to provide the information requested except
     in cases where they are bound by professional secrecy as defined in Article 308 of the Penal Code.


     Apart from on-the-spot checks and when summoned, the agents or investigators may make any useful findings; they may in
     particular, from an online public communication service, consult the data freely accessible or made accessible, including by recklessness,
     negligence or by the act of a third party, if necessary by accessing and maintaining in automated information processing systems the time
     required for findings; they can transcribe the data by any appropriate processing into documents that can be used directly for control
     purposes.


     A report is drawn up of the findings, verifications and visits carried out pursuant to this article. This report is drawn up contradictorily when the
     checks and visits are carried out on the spot or on invitation.


     Section 18-1
     Created the law of December n° 1.420 1st 2015 by

     For the exercise of the missions mentioned in the preceding article, the said agents or investigators may, after having informed the person
     in charge of the private professional premises or his representative of his right of opposition, access the places, premises, enclosures,
     installations or establishments serving to the implementation of the processing of personal information and which are for professional
     use, excluding the parts thereof assigned to the private home. The operations take place in the presence of the person in charge of the
     premises or his representative.
     When the right of opposition is exercised, the operations can only take place after the authorization of the President of the Court of First
     Instance, seized on request by the President of the Commission. The President of the Court rules taking into account in particular the reason
     or absence of reason justifying the opposition.
     The provisions of point 3° of article 22 are not applicable to the exercise of said right of opposition.
     However, when the urgency or an imminent risk of destruction or disappearance of items or documents justifies it, the operations
     mentioned in the first paragraph may take place without the person in charge of the premises or his representative being able to oppose
     the control operations. In this case, any interested person adversely affected by the said operations may ask the President of the Court of
     First Instance, seized and ruling as in the matter of summary proceedings, to declare the nullity of these operations and of the evidence
     gathered during them, which will have to be destroyed.


     Section 18-2
     Created December the law n° 1.420 of 1st 2015 by

     When there are reasons to suspect that the implementation of the processing does not comply with the provisions of this law, the said agents or
     investigators may, with the prior authorization of the President of the Court of First Instance, seized by the President of the Nominative
     Information Control Commission, and ruling by order on request, gain access to the premises.


     The request sets out the elements of fact and law likely to justify the said operations and to enable the President of the Court of First Instance
     to assess their merits.
     The order authorizing the operations is enforceable at the sole sight of the minute. It may be the subject of the appeal mentioned in
     article 852 of the Code of Civil Procedure within eight days of the control. This appeal is not suspensive.


     When granted, the President of the Court of First Instance may declare the nullity of these operations and of the evidence gathered during
     them, which must be destroyed.
     All of these operations take place in the presence of the person in charge of the premises or his representative or, in the event of
     impediment or impossibility, of at least one witness, required for this purpose by the persons referred to in the first paragraph of Article 18 and
     not being placed under their authority.


     Section 19
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December4, 2008 countingby; December 2015 replaced Law No. 1.420 of the 1st by


     When irregularities are detected against a data controller, the President of the Personal Information Control Commission has one of its
     members draw up a report which is notified to the data controller. The latter may, within one month of this notification, make observations to the
     Chairman.


     At the end of this adversarial procedure, the President of the Personal Information Control Commission may decide to send a warning to
     the controller. He may also send him a formal notice to put an end to the irregularities or to remove their effects.


     Irregularities constituting criminal offenses are immediately reported to the Attorney General.
     If the formal notice remains unsuccessful at the end of the period it has set, the President of the Commission may, after having previously
     invited the data controller to provide him with explanations within a further period of one month, issue an injunction to end the treatment or
     eliminate its effects. At the end of this period, if the injunction has not been acted upon, the President of the Commission may ask the President
     of the Court of  first instance, seized and ruling as in summary proceedings, whether it orders the cessation of treatment or
    that it orders the cessation of the processing or to remove its effects, without
     prejudice to the penal sanctions incurred or the requests for compensation from the persons concerned who have suffered damage. The
     decision may be accompanied by a penalty payment.
     The decisions taken by the President of the Commission in application of this article must be substantiated.
     The provisions of the fourth paragraph do not apply to legal persons governed by public law for which the President of the Commission
     may require the Minister of State to take all necessary measures to put an end to the irregularities observed or to their effects be removed.
     With regard to the administrative authorities not coming under the Minister of State, the latter refers the matter to the competent
     administrative bodies for the same purposes and may, in the event that the appropriate measures are not taken, proceed to do so ex officio
     in compliance with the provisions of Article 6 of the Constitution.


     The Chairman of the Personal Information Control Commission may decide to publish the decisions he takes pursuant to this article.
     Publicity measures may, in the event of serious and disproportionate harm to public security, to respect for private and family life or
     to the legitimate interests of the persons concerned, be the subject of an appeal before the President of the Court of First instance, seized
     and ruling as in summary proceedings, for the purpose of ordering the deletion of the publication.




     Chapter III bis - Transfer of personal information
     Chapter created on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December4, 2008 counting by


     Rule 20
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     The transfer of personal information outside the Principality can only take place provided that the country or organization to which
     the transfer takes place has an adequate level of protection.
     The adequacy of the level of protection offered by the third country must be assessed with regard to all the circumstances
     relating to a transfer of personal information, in particular the nature of the information, the purpose, the duration of the processing(s)
     envisaged, the rules of law in force in the country in question as well as the professional rules and safety measures which are
     respected there.
     Without prejudice to the preceding provisions, the commission for the control of personal information makes available to any
     interested party the list of countries having, within the meaning of the preceding paragraph, an adequate level of protection.


     Section 20-1
     Created in April 2009 the law n ° 1.353 of December 4, 2008 count 1st by

     The transfer of personal information to a country or an organization which does not ensure, within the meaning of the second paragraph
     of Article 20, an adequate level of protection may however take place if the person to whom the information relates has consented
     to their transfer or if the transfer is necessary:

             to safeguard that person's life; safeguarding the
             public interest; compliance with
             obligations to ensure the establishment, exercise or defense of a legal right; the consultation, under regular conditions, of a
             public register which, by virtue of legislative or regulatory provisions, is intended for the information of the public and is open to
             consultation by the latter or by any person justifying a legitimate interest; the performance of a contract between the data
             controller or his representative and the data
             subject, or of pre-contractual measures taken at the latter's request; the conclusion or performance of a contract concluded or to
             be concluded, in the interest of the data subject, between
             the controller or his representative and a third party.


     Without prejudice to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the control commission may authorize, on the basis of a duly
     substantiated request, a transfer of personal information to a country or an organization that does not ensure an adequate level of
     protection within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article 20, when the data controller, or his representative, as well as the
     recipient of the information offer sufficient guarantees to ensure compliance with the protection of the freedoms and rights mentioned in
     Article 1. These guarantees may in particular result from appropriate contractual clauses.

     The data controller is required to comply with the decision of the commission.


     Chapter IV - Penalties
     Section 21
     Replaced from April the law of December from 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by
     Are punished by imprisonment of one to six months and the fine provided for in number 3 of article 26 of the penal code or one of
     these two penalties only:

          1°) those who implement or attempt to implement automated processing of personal information or who pursue or attempt to
             pursue the implementation of this processing without having carried out the prior formalities or obtained the
             authorizations provided for in Articles 6, 7, 7-1 and 11-1;
          2°) those who, except for the derogations provided for by law, voluntarily abstain from communicating to an interested person the
             personal information concerning him, from modifying or deleting that of this information which has proved to be inaccurate,
             incomplete, ambiguous or collected in violation of the law;
          3°) those who, as a result of imprudence or negligence, do not preserve or cause to be preserved the security of personal
             information or disclose or allow to be disclosed information having the effect of damaging the reputation of a person or his
             private or family life;
          4°) those who keep personal information beyond the period indicated in the declaration, the request
             of opinion or the request for authorization or the deadline set by the commission for the control of personal information;
          5°) those who, except in the cases provided for in Articles 20 and 20-1, transfer or cause to be transferred information
             personal data to countries or organizations that do not have adequate protection;
          6°) those who, in disregard of article 14, collect personal information without the person
             concerned has been informed, unless informing this person proves impossible or involves disproportionate efforts, or if the
             collection or communication of information is expressly provided for by the applicable legislative or regulatory provisions;
             7°) those who disregard the provisions of article 14-2.



     Section 22
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     Are punished by imprisonment from three months to one year and the fine provided for in number 4 of article 26 of the Penal Code
     or one of these two penalties only:

          1°) those who, except for the derogations provided for by law, collect or cause to be collected, record or cause to be recorded,
             keep or cause to be kept, use or cause to be used personal information reserved for certain authorities, establishments,
             organizations and natural persons or information likely to reveal political, racial or ethnic, religious, philosophical or
             trade union opinions or affiliations or relating to health, including genetic data, sex life, mores or measures of a social nature;



          2°) those who collect or cause to be collected personal information by employing or having employed
             fraudulent, unfair or unlawful means;
          3°) those who voluntarily prevent or hinder the investigations carried out for the application of the law or do not
             not provide the requested information or documents;
          4°) those who knowingly communicate or cause to be communicated inaccurate information or documents either to
             interested persons or those responsible for carrying out the necessary investigations;
          5°) those who collect or cause to be collected, record or cause to be recorded, keep or cause to be kept, use or cause to be
             used personal information despite the opposition of the person concerned, except in the cases provided for by law;


          6°) those who, with the exception of the competent authorities, knowingly collect or cause to be collected, record or cause to
             be recorded, keep or cause to be kept, use or cause to be used personal information with or without biometric data
             concerning offences, convictions or security measures or whose purpose is the prevention, investigation, observation or
             prosecution of criminal offenses or the execution of criminal convictions or security measures; 

7°) those who knowingly
             collect or cause to be collected, record or cause to be
          recorded, keep or cause to be kept, use or cause to be used personal information relating to suspicions of illicit activities, offences,
             security measures or containing data biometrics necessary to check the identity of persons or intended for surveillance purposes
             without having obtained the authorization provided for in Article 11-1; 
8°) those who knowingly communicate to persons
             not qualified to receive information the disclosure of which may harm the reputation of a natural person or his private
          and family life;

          9°) those who knowingly use or cause to be used personal information for a purpose other than that mentioned in the declaration,
             the request for an opinion or the request for authorization


     Section 23
     Modified from April 2009 to Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting 1st by

     Any conviction pronounced pursuant to the two previous articles entails, as of right, the cessation of the effects of the declaration or
     authorization and the removal from the directory of automated processing.
     The court may, in addition, order the confiscation and destruction, without compensation, of the supports of the incriminated personal
     information and prohibit the re-registration in the directory for a period which may not exceed three years nor be less than six months.


     He may also order that the legal person under private law be held jointly and severally with its statutory representative to pay the fine
     imposed on the latter.


     Rule 23-1
     Created in April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by

     No interconnection can be made between the criminal record and any other file or processing of personal information held by any person or
     by a service not dependent on the direction of the judicial services.




     Chapter V - Scope
     Title replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December4, 2008 counted by


     Section 24
     Replaced on April 1, 2009 by Law No. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by
     The provisions of this law are applicable to the automated processing of personal information:

              implemented by a data controller established in Monaco; implemented in
              Monaco, even if this processing is only intended for use abroad; whose controller is established abroad, but uses
             processing facilities located in Monaco; in this case, the data controller must appoint a representative established in Monaco, who
             makes the declaration, the request for an opinion or the request for authorization and who is responsible for the obligations
             provided for by law, without prejudice to actions that could be brought against the data controller himself.


     When the automated processing of personal information implemented abroad is only accessible for consultation in Monaco by automatic
     means, their users in the Principality are subject to the provisions of this law, with the exception of those of sections III and IV of the
     first chapter


     Section 24-1
     Created on April 1, 2009 by law no. 1.353 of December 4, 2008 counting by

     The provisions of this law, with the exception of those of sections III and IV of chapter I, are applicable to the nominative information
     contained or intended to appear in a non-automated or computerized file, namely in a structured set of nominative information accessible
     according to specific criteria.


     Rule 24-2
     Created in April the law of December counting 1st 2009 n° 1.353 4 2008 by

     The provisions of the law are not applicable:

          1°) processing carried out within the framework of Article 15 of the Constitution; 2°) to the
          processing implemented by the judicial authority for the purposes of the procedures carried out before the various jurisdictions as
             well as the procedures for international legal assistance;
          3°) automated processing and non-automated files of personal information implemented by a
             natural person in the exclusive context of his personal or domestic activities


     Section 25
   
     The provisions of Articles 12, 13, 14, 15, 15-2 and 16 as well as those of Chapter III do not apply bis to automated processing or to
     non-automated or mechanical files of personal information implemented for the sole purpose of expressing literary and artistic, or
     for the sole purpose of exercising the activity of journalist, in compliance with the applicable laws and ethical rules, insofar as these
     exemptions and derogations are necessary to reconcile the right to privacy with the rules governing freedom of expression.


     The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not preclude the application of the laws relating to the written or audiovisual
     press which provide for the conditions for exercising the right of reply and which prevent, limit, remedy and, if necessary, punish
     violations of privacy and reputation of individuals


     Section 25-1
     Created in April 2009 the law n ° 1.353 of December4, 2008 count 1st by
     The terms of application of this law are set by sovereign order.


     Rule 26
     Replaced from April 2009 the law n° 1.353 of December 2008 counting 1st 4 by
     The authorizations issued by the Commission for the Control of Personal Information under Articles 9, 11-1 and 20-1 may, in order to
     ensure the interests protected by this law, be subject to specific conditions.
     They may be withdrawn when the beneficiary infringes the provisions of the said law or the texts adopted for its application,
     exceeds the limits of the authorization issued to him or disregards the conditions mentioned therein.
     Prior to any decision, the person concerned is heard in his explanations or duly called upon to provide them.