COMPUTER-PROCESSED PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION LAW
Promulgated on 11 August 1995
Disclaimer: This translation is unofficial as a point of reference only and should not be regarded as a substitute for proper legal advice.
Chapter 1: General Principles
Chapter2: Data Processing by Public Institutions
Chapter 3: Data Processing of Non-Public Institutions
Chapter 4: Compensation for Damages and Other Remedies
Chapter 5: Penalty
Chapter 6: Ancillary Provisions
Enforcement Rules

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PRINCIPALS
ARTICLE 1
This Law is enacted to regulate the computerized processing of personal data so as to avoid any
infringement of the rights appertaining to an individual's personality and facilitate reasonable use of
personal data.
ARTICLE 2
Protection of personal data shall be based on this Law; however, where other laws provide otherwise, the
said laws shall apply.
ARTICLE 3
Definitions of terms used herein are as follows:
1.The term "personal data" means the name, date of birth, uniform number of identification card, special
features, finger print, marriage, family, education, profession, health condition, medical history, financial
condition, and social activities of a natural person as well as other data sufficient to identify the said
person.
2.The term "personal data file" means a collection of personal data stored in an electromagnetic recorder
or other similar media for specific purposes.
3.The term "computerized processing" means to use computers or automatic machines for input, storage,
compilation, correction, indexing, deletion, output, transmission, or other processing of data.
4.The term "collection means" acquisition of personal data for establishment of personal data files.
5.The term "use" means that a public institution or a non-public institution uses the personal data file
maintained by it for internal use or provides the personal data file for use by a third party other than a
concerned party.
6.The term "public institution" means any agency at central or local government level performing official
authorities by law.
7.The term "non-public institution" means the following enterprises, organizations, or individuals other
than the public institution prescribed in Subparagraph 6 above:


Any credit investigation business or organization or individual whose principal business is to
make the collection or computerized processing of personal data.
Any hospital, school, telecommunication business, financial business, securities business,
insurance business, and mass media.
Other enterprises, organizations, or individuals designated by the Ministry of Justice and the
central government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises.

8.The term "concerned party" means the person whose personal information is a subject matter.
9.The term "specific purpose" means the purpose which shall be determined by the Ministry of Justice in
conjunction with the central competent authorities having the primary jurisdiction over the enterprise
concerned.
ARTICLE 4
Any concerned party shall not waive in advance or limit with special conditions the following rights to be
exercised hereunder in respect of his/her personal data:
1.Inquiry and request for review.
2.Request for duplicates.
3.Request for supplements or amendments.
4.Request for cease of computerized processing and use.
5.Request for deletion.
ARTICLE 5
In respect of any organization or individual entrusted by a public institution or a non-public institution with
the work of data-processing, the person who does the work of data-processing shall be deemed as a
member of the entrusting institution within the scope of application of this Law.
ARTICLE 6
Collection and use of personal data shall be made in good-faith and with consideration of rights and
interests of the concerned party and shall not transgress the scope of necessity for a specific purpose.
back to the top
CHAPTER 2: DATA PROCESSING BY PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS
ARTICLE 7
Any public institution shall not make collection or computerized processing of personal data unless for
specific purposes and in conformity to any one of the following circumstances:
Within the scope of necessity for its official functions as provided in laws and/or ordinances.
With the written consent of a concerned party.
No potential harm to be done to the rights and interests of a concerned party.
ARTICLE 8
Use of personal data by a public institution shall be within the scope of necessity for its official functions
as provided in laws and/or ordinances and in conformity to the specific purposes of collection; however,
use beyond the specific purposes may be made under any one of the following circumstances:
1.Expressly provided by law.
2.With legitimate cause and for internal use only.
3.To protect national security.
4.To enhance public interest.
5.To avoid emergent danger to the life, body, freedom, or property of a concerned party.
6.Necessary for preventing grave damages to rights and interests of others.
7.Necessary for academic research without harm to the major interests of others.
8.Favorable to rights and interests of a concerned party.
9.With written consent of a concerned party.

ARTICLE 9
International transmission and use of personal data by public institution shall be in accordance with
relevant laws and ordinances.
ARTICLE 10
Any public institution maintaining a personal data file shall publish the following information and its
changes in the official gazette or in other proper manners:
1.Name of the personal data file.
2.Name of the public institution maintaining the file.
3.Name of the public institution using the personal data file.
4.Basis and specific purposes of maintaining a personal data file.
5.Classification of personal information.
6.Scope of personal information.
7.Collection method of personal data.
8.Places where personal information is usually transmitted to recipients and recipients thereof. 9.Direct
recipients of international transmission of personal information.
10.Name and address of the public institution accepting applications for inquiry, amendment, and review
of personal data.
The classification of personal information mentioned in Subparagraph 5 of the preceding paragraph shall
be stipulated by the Ministry of Justice and the central government authorities in charge of concerned end
enterprises.
ARTICLE 11
The following personal data files may not be subject to application of provisions in the preceding Article:
1.Relating to national security, diplomatic and military secret, overall economic interest, or other grave
interest of the country.
2.Relating to cases under examination by Grand Justices of Judicial Yuan, cases under examination by
Committee on the Discipline of Public Functionaries, and matters concerning court investigation, trial,
judgment, execution, or processing of non-litigation affairs.
3.Relating to crime prevention, criminal investigation, execution, corrective - protective measures of the
offenders, or prisoner's after-jail protection.
4.Relating to administrative punishment and compulsory execution thereof.
5.Relating to administration of border entrance and exit, security examination or refugee examination.
6.Relating to taxes and collection thereof.
7.Relating to personnel, daily duties, salary, sanitation, welfare, or relevant affairs of government
agencies.
8.Specially provided for test of computerized processing.
To be deleted before publication in official gazette.
9.Relating only to the name, residence, money and article exchange relations of a concerned party for the
need of official business contact. Made individually for internal use by government staff solely in carrying
out its personal duties.
10.Others specially provided in laws.
ARTICLE 12
A public institution shall, upon request by a concerned party, reply inquiries on, permit review of, and
make duplicates of the personal data file maintained by it except for any one of the following
circumstances:
1.The personal data file may not be published under the preceding Article.
2.Likely to cause interference with public functions.
3.Likely to undermine the great interest of a third party.

ARTICLE 13
A public institution shall maintain personal information with accuracy and make timely amendments or
supplements ex officio or upon request by a concerned party.
Where there is a dispute about accuracy of personal information, a public institution shall cease
computerized processing and use of concerned personal information ex officio or upon request by the
concerned party except that the said personal information is required for carrying out official duty and the
dispute is noted or the consent of the concerned party has been obtained. When the specific purpose of
computerized processing of personal information no longer exists or the time limit there of expires, a
public institution may, ex officio or upon request by a concerned party, delete or cease computerized
processing and use the said information except that the said information is required for carrying out
official duties, change of purpose is made hereunder, or the written consent of the concerned party has
been obtained.
ARTICLE 14
A public institution shall maintain books and records to register information published under Paragraph 1,
Article 10 hereof for public consult.
ARTICLE 15
A public institution shall process request made by a concerned party hereunder within thirty (30) days
upon receipt of such request or advise in writing the requester of reasons if process of the request can
not be completed within said time limit.
ARTICLE 16
In respect of a request for inquiry on, review of or duplicates of personal information, a public institution
may charge a proper amount of fees therefor.
ARTICLE 17
A public institution maintaining a personal data file shall designate a special staff to take exclusive charge
of maintenance of safety in accordance with relevant laws and ordinances so as to prevent personal data
from burglary, alteration, destruction, extinction, or disclosure.
back to the top
CHAPTER 3 - DATA PROCESSING OF NON-PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS
ARTICLE 18
Unless for a specific purpose and satisfying any of the following requirements, a non-government
organization should not collect or process by computer the personal data:
1.Upon written consent from the party concerned;
2.Having a contractual or quasi-contractual relationship with the party concerned and having no
3.potential harm to be done to the party concerned;
4.Such personal data is already in public domain and having no harm to the major interest of the party
concerned;
5.For purpose of academic research and having no harm to the major interest of the party concerned; or
6.Specifically provided by the relevant laws in Article 3 (7) ii and other laws.
ARTICLE 19
A non-public institution not registered with the government authority in charge of concerned end
enterprises and issued with a license shall not engage in collection, computerized processing,
international transmission, and use of personal data.

A credit investigation business and any organization or individual whose principal business is to make
collection or computerized processing of personal data shall obtain permission from the government
authority in charge of concerned end enterprises and register therewith and issued with a license.
Registration procedures, conditions precedent of permission, and criteria of charges in relation to the
preceding two paragraphs shall be stipulated by the central government authorities in charge of
concerned end enterprises.
ARTICLE 20
Application for registration prescribed in the preceding Article shall be made in writing with description of
the following information:
1.Applicant's name, place of residence or domicile. If the applicant is a juridical person or non-juridical
organization, its names, principal office, branch office(s), or business operation office(s) and its
representative's or administrator's name, place of residence or domicile.
2.Name of the personal data file.
3.Specific purposes of maintaining a personal data file.
4.Classification of personal information.
5.Scope of personal information.
6.Period to maintain a personal data file.
7.Collection method of personal data.
8.Scope of use of personal data file.
9.Direct recipients of international transmission of personal information.
10Name of person responsible for preserving personal data file.
11Safety maintenance plan of personal data file.
Change of registration shall be applied for within fifteen (15) days after any change of the above said
information. Termination of registration shall be applied for within one (1) month from occurrence of cause
of business termination.
When termination of registration is applied for under the preceding paragraph, method of disposal of the
personal data maintained by the applicant shall be reported to the government authorities in charge of
concerned end enterprises for approval.
The specific purposes and classification of information mentioned in Sub-paragraph 3, Paragraph 1
above shall be stipulated by the Ministry of Justice and the central government authorities in charge of
concerned end enterprise. Criteria of safety maintenance plan of personal data file mentioned in
Subparagraph 11, paragraph 1 and the method of disposal mentioned in paragraph 3 above shall be
stipulated by government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises.
ARTICLE 21
When registration is approved, information prescribed in Subparagraphs through 10, Paragraph 1 of the
preceding Article shall be published in an official gazette and local newspapers.
ARTICLE 22
A non-public institution shall maintain books and records to register information prescribed in
Subparagraphs 1 through 10, Paragraph 1, Article 20 for public consultation.
ARTICLE 23
Use of personal information by a non-public institution shall be within the scope of necessity for the
specific purpose of collection; however, use beyond the specific purpose may be made under any one of
the following circumstances:
1.To enhance public interest;
2.To avoid emergent danger to the life, body, freedom, or property of a concerned party;
3.Where it is necessary for preventing grave damages to rights and interests of others; or
4.With written consent of a concerned party.
ARTICLE 24
Under any one of the following circumstances, the government authorities in charge of concerned end
enterprises may restrict international transmission and use of personal information by non-public
institutions hereunder:
1.Involving great interest of this country.
2.Specially provided in an international treaty or agreement.
3.Where the receiving country lacks proper laws and/or ordinances to adequately protect personal data
and where are apprehensions of injury to the rights and interests of a concerned party.
4.To indirectly transmit to and use from a third country personal information so as to evade control of this
Law.
ARTICLE 25
A government authority in charge of concerned end enterprises may, if necessary, dispatch officials with
identification documents to order a non-public institution under its control in respect of permission or
registration to provide relevant data or give other necessary cooperation in relation to matters provided
herein and visit the said non-public institution to conduct inspections. If any data violating this Law is
found, the data may be seized. The non-public institution shall not evade, hinder or refuse any order,
inspection, or seizure under the above paragraph.
ARTICLE 26
Articles 12, 13, 15, Paragraph 1, Article 16, and Article 17 shall apply mutatis mutandis to non-public
institution. The charge criteria of a non-public institution applying mutatis mutandis Paragraph 1, Article
16 shall be stipulated by the central government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises.
back to the top
Chapter 4: Compensation for Damages and Other Remedies
ARTICLE 27
A public institution violating provisions herein thus causing damages to the rights and interests of a
concerned party shall be liable for compensation for damages except that the damage is due to acts of
God, accidents, or other causes of force majeure.
The aggrieved party though having suffered non-pecuniary damage still may claim for monetary
compensation in a proper amount and, if having suffered any damage in reputation, for proper measures
to rehabilitate his/her reputation.
The total amount of compensation for damages prescribed in the preceding two paragraphs shall be not
less than NT$20,000 and not more than NT$ 100,000 for each event to each person unless there is
evidence to prove a higher amount of damages.
In case of compensation for damages in favor of a number of injured parties due to one single cause, the
aggregated sum of compensation amount shall be limited to NT$20,000,000.
The claim for compensation as prescribed in Paragraph 2 above shall not be transferred or inherited,
except in case of a claim for monetary compensation which has been acknowledged by contract or upon
which an action has been commenced.

ARTICLE 28
A non-public institution violating provisions herein thus causing damages to the interests of a concerned
party shall be liable for compensation for damages except that it can prove that it has no intention or fault.
Provisions in Paragraphs 2 through 5 of the preceding Article shall be applicable to request except that it
can prove that it has no intention or fault. Provisions in Paragraphs 2 through 5 of the preceding Article
shall be applicable to request for compensation set forth in the above paragraph.
ARTICLE 29
The claim for compensation for damages shall extinguish after two (2) years from the time when the
injured party becomes aware of the damage and the obliger to make compensation or after five (5) years
from the time of occurrence of the damage.
ARTICLE 30
In respect of compensation for damages, in addition to application of this Law, the National Liability Law
shall apply to government agencies and the Civil Code to non-public institution.
ARTICLE 31
Where a concerned party is refused or a request is not attended within the time limit prescribed in Article
4 by a public institution, the concerned party may, within twenty (20) days after the refusal or expiry of the
time limit, request in writing the supervising authority to take proper action.
ARTICLE 32
Where a concerned party is refused the exercised rights of those prescribed in Article 4 by a non-public
institution or after the expiry of the fixed period for reply, the concerned party may, within twenty (20) days
after the refusal, request in writing the government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises to
take proper action. The government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises mentioned above
shall inform, within two (2) months after the receipt of the request, the requesting party of the result of its
action. If the request is found with merits, a demand on the non-public institution to correct within a limited
time period shall be made.
back to the top
CHAPTER 5 - PENALTY
ARTICLE 33
A person, with an intention to seek profits, who violates Articles 7, 8, 18 and 19, Paragraphs 1, and 2,
Article 23, or a restriction order issued under Article 24 of this Law and thereby causing damages to
others, shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or, or in addition
thereto a fine of not more than NT$40,000.
ARTICLE 34
A person, with an intention to acquire illegal interests for its personal or third party's benefit, or damage
other's interests, who makes illegal output, interference, alteration, and deletion of a personal data file or
impedes the accuracy of a personal data file causing damages to others shall be punished with
imprisonment for not more than three (3) years, detention, or a fine of not more than NT$50,000.
ARTICLE 35
A public official who takes advantage of his authority, opportunity or means afforded by his official
position to commit an offence provided by the preceding two Articles shall be subject up to one and a half
times punishment prescribed for such offense as provided in the preceding two Articles.
ARTICLE 36
Prosecution for any offence specified in this Chapter may be instituted only upon complaint.

ARTICLE 37
Any more severe punishment stipulated in any other laws against any offence specified in this Chapter
shall be applicable.
ARTICLE 38
Where a concerned institution meets any one of the following circumstances, the responsible person of
the said institution shall be punished by the government authorities in charge of the concerned end
enterprise with a fine of not less than NT$20,000 and not more than NT$100,000, a time limit for
correction shall also be prescribed. In case no correction is made within the given time limit, the
preceding fine will be imposed on the responsible person of a concerned institution for each violation until
correction is made. 1. Violation of Article 18 of this Law 2. Violation of Paragraphs 1 or 2, Article 19 of this
Law. 3. Violation of Article 23 of this Law 4. Violation of restriction order issued under Article 24 of this
Law.
In case of a serious violation of Subparagraphs 1, 3, or 4 of the preceding paragraph, the permission
granted or registration made hereunder may be revoked or canceled.
ARTICLE 39
Where a concerned institution meets any one of the following circumstances, it shall be prescribed by the
government authorities in charge of concerned end enterprises a time limit for correction. In case no
correction is made within the given time limit, the responsible person of the said concerned organization
shall be punished with a fine of not less than NT$10,000 and not more than NT$50,000 for each violation
until correction is made.
1.Violation of Paragraph 2, Article 20 of this Law.
2.Violation of Article 21 of this Law regarding publication in local newspapers.
3.Violation of Article 22 of this Law.
4.Violation of Paragraph 1, Article 26 for which Articles 12, 13, 15 and 17 are applicable mutatis
mutandis.
5.Violation of charge criteria of Paragraph 2, Article 26 of this Law.
In case of a serious violation of Subparagraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4 of preceding paragraph, the permission
granted or registration made hereunder may be revoked or canceled.
ARTICLE 40
Where a concerned organization institution, the responsible person of the said institution meets one of the
following circumstances shall be punished by the government authorities in charge of concerned end
enterprises with a fine of not less than NT$10,000 and not more than NT$50,000 for each violation until
correction is made.
1.Failure to comply with the method of disposal approved by the government authorities in charge of
concerned end enterprises under Paragraph 3, Article 20 of this Law.
2.Violation of Paragraph 2, Article 25 of this Law.
Violation of the official order for correction within a time limit under Paragraph 2, Article 32 of this 3.Law.
In case of a serious violation of Subparagraphs 2 or 3 of the preceding Paragraph, the permission
granted or registration made hereunder may be revoked or canceled.
ARTICLE 41
Where a fine imposed under this Law which has not been paid within the time limit given in a notice, shall
be transferred to the court for compulsory execution.
back to the top
CHAPTER 6 - ANCILLARY PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 42
The Ministry of Justice shall be responsible for coordination and contact of matters relating to execution of
this Law and rules governing such coordination and contact shall be enacted by the said Ministry. In case
there is no government authority in charge of a certain end enterprise, matters to be handled by a
government authority in charge of concerned end enterprises as provided herein shall be handled by the
Ministry of Justice. The Ministry of Justice and government authorities in charge of concerned end
enterprises may, if necessary, entrust any public welfare body with the administration of registration,
publication, or other matters relating to collection, computerized processing, and use of personal data by
non-public institutions.
ARTICLE 43
For operations of collection or computerized processing of personal data already occurred before
promulgation of this Law, registration or permission thereof, if required hereunder, shall be
supplementarily applied for within one (1) year from the date of promulgation of this Law. Enterprises,
organizations, or individuals designated by the Ministry of Justice and the central government authorities
in charge of concerned end enterprises under Item 3, Subparagraph 8, Article 3 of this Law, shall apply
for registration or permission within six (6) months from the date of designation. Failure to file an
application within the time limit prescribed in the preceding two paragraphs or rejection of an application
shall be deemed that no approval of registration or permission is given.
ARTICLE 44
The Enforcement Rules of this Law shall be enacted by the Ministry of Justice.
ARTICLE 45
This Law shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
THE ENFORCEMENT RULES OF COMPUTER PROCESSED PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION LAW
Promulgated on 1 May 1996
Disclaimer: This translation is unofficial as a point of reference only and should not be regarded as a
substitute for proper legal advice.
Article 1
These Enforcement Rules are enacted pursuant to Article 44 of the Computer Processed Personal Data
Protection Law (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
Article 2
The individual as referred to herein shall mean a specific or identifiable living natural person.
Article 3
The electromagnetic recorders or other similar media mentioned in Item 2, Article 3 of the Act shall mean
material objects with electromagnetic records stored thereon, including magnetic disks, magnetic tapes,
photoelectric disks, magnetic-bubble records, magnetic drums and objects made of other materials and
capable of storing electromagnetic records. The electromagnetic records mentioned in the preceding
Paragraph shall mean those records made, for the purpose of computer - processing, via electronic,
magnetic and other methods which enable such records not to be directly recognizable with the human
eye.
Article 4
The personal data files referred to in Item 2, Article 3 of the Act shall include back-up files.
Article 5
The automatic machine referred to in Item 3, Article 3 of the Act shall mean a machine having similar
functions to procedure or progress originally needed to be conducted in a step by step sequence, into an
automatic progression.
Article 6
The third party referred to in Item 5, Article 3 of the Act shall mean any natural person, juridical person or
organization other than a public institution or a private entity, which keeps personal data files, but not
including the organization or individual entrusted with data processing.
Article 7
The enterprise, organization or individual referred to in Sub-item 3, Item 7, Article 3 of the Act shall mean
any of the former whose business data involving computerized processing massive personal data
sufficiently affects the rights and interests of a data subject and thus needs to be regulated.
Article 8
When a data subject exercises the right provided in Article 4 of the Act toward a public institution,
procedures should be stipulated by the public institution. When a data subject exercises the right provided
in Article 4 of the Act toward a private entity, procedures should be stipulated by the central competent
authority which has the primary jurisdiction over such entity.
Article 9
When a data subject exercises the rights provided in Items 1 and 2, Article 4 his or her personal data
shall be limited to those, which can be printed out from the personal data file.
Article 10
The deletion referred to in Item 5, Article 4 of the Act shall mean to erase the personal data which has
been stored in the personal data file and make said data unidentifiable pursuant to provisions in Para. 3,
Article 13 of the Act.
Article 11
An organization or individual entrusted with data processing by a public institution or private entity shall
process personal data pursuant to provisions of the Act. Under the above said circumstance, the data
subject shall exercise the rights provided in the Act toward the entrusting party.
Article 12
The phrase "advantageous to the interests of a data subject" as set forth in Item 8, Article 8 of the Act
shall mean the situation where the circumstances obviously favor the data subject and that the data
subject would not refuse if he/she learns the situation.
Article 13
The international transmission and utilization referred to in Articles 9 and 24 of the Act shall mean
transmission and utilization via cable, radio, optical or other electromagnetic system over communication
networks, bur not including transmission by mail, hand-carried microfilms, perforated cards, computer
reports or printouts, or electromagnetic records.
Article 14
Public announcements made by a public institution under Para. 1, Article 10 of the Act shall be made
within one month after a personal data file is put on line for use. In case of any alteration of data, public
announcement thereof shall be made within one month after the alteration. The methods of making public
announcement as referred in the preceding Paragraph shall be specified and avoided from being
changed at will.
Article 15
The "other proper methods" referred to in Para. 1, Article 10 of the Act shall mean using television,
newspaper, magazine or other media that is available to the public to make public announcements. The
period of a public announcement shall not be less than two days.
Article 16
The names of organizations authorized to use personal data files under Item 3, Para. 1, Article 10 of the
Act may be announced publicly by listing the general scope and total number of authorized organizations
thereof; however, if any organization uses data beyond the specific purpose, the name of such
organization and its use which conforms with one of the conditions provided in Article 8 of the Act shall be
stated in the public announcement.
Article 17
The "basis" referred to in Item 4, Para. 1, Article 10 of the Act shall mean the legal or executive project
basis for maintaining personal data file.
Article 18
For the "place" referred to in Item 8, Para. 1, Article 10 of the Act, the address thereof shall be given; if
the "recipient" referred to in the same Item is a juridical person or an entity, its title and the name of the
representative shall be stated and if it refers to an individual, his/her name shall be given. For the "direct
recipient" referred to in Item 9, Para. 1, Article 10 and Item 9, Article 20 of the Act, the address thereof
shall be given; if it is a juridical person or an entity, the nationality, the name and the name of its
representative shall be stated and if it refers to an individual, his/her nationality and name shall be given.
If the agency prescribed in Item 10, Para. 1, Article 10 of the Act is the same as that which retain personal
data files, said agency need not publicly announce the matters provided in said Item.
Article 19
Affairs of entry and exit control as referred to in Item 5, Article 11 of the Act shall included personal
passport affairs. Personnel matters referred to in Item 7, Article 11 of the Act shall mean basic personal
data and the relevant data concerning selection and appointment of all civil servants, which are kept and
stored by public institutions at various levels and the authority in charge of the selection and appointment
of officials, including administration matters, such as curricula vitae, examination records or other ratings
of trainees kept by government training authorities. Any doubt about the identification of the data as
referred in the preceding Paragraph shall be clarified by competent authorities.
Article 21
The phrase "exclusively for experimental computer - processing" referred to in Item 8, Article 11 of the Act
shall mean the personal data files exclusively for temporary use for experiments and tests and be subject
to destruction within six months.
Article 22
The phrase "injuring the major interests of a third party" referred to in Item 3, Article 12 of the Act shall
mean one of the following circumstances:
1.Detrimental to the life, body, freedom, property or other major interests of a third party; or
2.Said personal data is obtained from a third party and disclosure of it to the data subject will do harm to
the relationship of assistance or trust relationship between the data keeping agency and said third party.
Article 23
The "correctness" referred to in Para. 1, Article 13 of the Act shall mean that when used within the scope
of a specific purpose, personal data must be used as precise, complete and up-to-date as possible. The
language "timely" referred to in Para. 1, Article 13 of the Act shall mean that the public institution
concerned shall make correction or supplements as soon as possible. The phrase "carrying out official
duties" referred to Para. 2 and 3, Article 13 of the Act shall mean that public institutions perform their
duties in accordance with the laws and regulations; or private entities operate their businesses or perform
acts in line with its purpose of establishment. The phrase "extinction of a specific purpose" referred to in
Para. 3, Article 13 of the Act shall mean one of the following circumstances:
1.The public institution concerned has been deactivated or reorganized;
2.The private entity concerned has changed its business items, suspended its business, wound up or
dissolved;
3.The specific purpose has been fulfilled and there are no need for further use; or
4.There are other matters sufficient to indicate that the said specific purpose can not be achieved.
Article 24
Where a public institution corrects, supplements, deletes any data or ceases computerized processing
and utilization thereof, it shall notify the agencies, organizations or individuals which, to its knowledge,
have received said data.
The personal data mentioned in the preceding Paragraph includes computer printed statements or other
recordable articles. However, if the Act or other laws provide otherwise, such special provisions shall
supersede.
Article 25
In requesting a public institution for a supplement or correction of personal data pursuant to Para. 1,
Article 13 of the Act, a data subject shall submit sufficient evidence for such requested supplement or
correction.
Article 26
The registers and books prescribed in Articles 14 & 22 of the Act may be substituted with computer
terminal equipment or related equipment or documents of the said agency, which can be used by a data
subject to check and view. The registers and books kept by a public institution pursuant to Article 14 and
by a private entity pursuant to Article 22 of the Act, other than matters prescribed in Para. 1, Article 10
and Item 1 through 10, Para. 1, Article 20 of the Act, shall also include information concerning the
duration under which the data will be kept and whether it has been disclosed. The in-charge
administration units and the places where data file review for registers and books shall be designated by
public institutions and private entities.
Article 28
Fees that are charged by a public institution and/or a private entity for personal data file review and
copying services should reflect the actual cost thereof.
Article 29
Where a Private entity applies for registration under Para. 1, Article 20 of the Act, more than two specific
purposes may be registered. Article 30 The "written consent from a data subject" referred to in Item 1,
Article 18 of the Act shall mean according to the papers executed between a private entity and a data
subject, it sufficiently indicates consent from said party. In order to obtain written consents from a data
subject a private entity, for a specific purpose, shall at the time of the initial contact, deliver to said data
subject in person or to his/her statutory representative relevant data for collection, computerized
processing or use within the specific purpose, together with papers requesting for expression of
objections thereto within a specified period; if no objection is made in such specified period, it shall be
presumed that the data subject has given his/her written consent.
Article 31
The "agreements" referred to in Item 2, Article 18 of the Act shall not be limited to those executed after
implementation of the Act.
Article 32
The "quasi-contractual relationship" referred to in Item 2, Article 18 of the Act shall mean one of the
following relations:
The special relationship of trust formed through contacts and discussions for the propose of executing an
agreement or of entering into a transaction between a private entity and a data subject before an
agreement is executed; or
The special relationship of contact formed between a private entity and a data subject for the purpose of
exercise of rights, performance of obligations or ensuring completeness of personal data when an
agreement no longer exists because of invalidation, cancellation, termination or performance.
The "data in the public domain" referred to in Item 3, Article 18 of the Act shall mean the personal data
that can be legally obtained or learned by any non-specific third party.
Article 33
The "rates of fees" referred to in Para. 3, Article 19 of the Act shall mean the amounts of fees of
examination, registration, license, etc. charged by the government authorities which have the primary
jurisdiction over the enterprises concerned at various levels for receiving registration, granting permission
and issuing license in accordance with the Act.
Article 34
A public institution which keeps personal data files shall stipulate rules of safety protection of computer
processed personal data, the contents of which shall include data safety and examination, equipment
management and other safety protection measures.
Article 35
The provision of Para. 1, Article 24, Article 25 and Article 34 shall apply mutatis mutandis to private
entities.
Article 36
The report of handling methods submitted by a private entity under Para. 3, Article 20 of the Act shall
include the following information in accordance with each method:
Destruction.
i.Means of destruction.
ii.Time and place of destruction.
iii.Evidence of destruction.
Transfer Reason of transfer, such as selling, giving out or other reasons.
i.Transferee, including its nature, i.e. a public institution or a private entity and, in case of the latter, the
type of its business.
ii.Basis and evidence to support that the transferee is entitled to keep said personal data file. iii.Method,
time and place of transfer.
The competent authority which has the primary jurisdiction over the enterprise concerned may, if
necessary, dispatch personnel to supervise over the destruction or transfer.
After completing the destruction or transfer as referred in the first Paragraph, a private entity shall submit
evidence of the same to the government authority having the primary jurisdiction over the enterprise
concerned.
Article 37
When a private entity makes a public announcement under Article 21 of the Act, the announcement shall
be made within two months after approval of its registration or of its change of registration.
Article 38
The "publication in local newspapers" provided in Article 21 of the Act shall run at least for a period of no
less than two days.
Article 39
The following information may be excluded from the public announcement made by the private entity,
published in local newspapers in accordance with Article 21 of the Act:
1.The personnel, services, salary, hygiene, welfare or other related matters of said private entity.
2.For test purpose of computerized processing only.
3.To be deleted before public announcement.
4.Other laws' special provisions.
Article 40
The expression "if necessary" referred to in Para. 1, Article 25 of the Act shall mean that there are facts
sufficiently proving the violation or likelihood of violation of Articles 18 through 24 of the Act by a private
entity. The certification documents provided in Para. 1, Article 25 of the Act shall cover the following
information: The name of the inspection authority. The name and title of inspector. Basis of inspection.
The inspecting authority shall keep secrets and consider the reputation of the inspected party.
Article 41
When making an inspection in accordance with Article 25 of the Act, requesting the inspected to provide
information, written statements or other things, or seizing anything, the competent authority having the
primary jurisdiction over the enterprise concerned shall issue a receipt stating the name, quantity and
owner of the seized items, and the place and time for such seizure. The competent authority having the
primary jurisdiction over the enterprise concerned shall, after conducting an inspection, maintain a record
thereof stating the inspection procedures, information requested, results of inspection and other related
measures as well as, in case of anything seized, the particulars required are to be stated in the receipt
prescribed in the preceding Artide.
If made on the spot, the record referred in the preceding paragraph shall be read and signed by the
inspected, who may separately make written comments thereto. However, if the records are made
afterwards, a copy of the record shall be sent to the inspected with a note that comments thereto may be
made while the inspected may comment in writing upon receipt thereof. If the competent authority having
the primary jurisdiction over the enterprise concerned determines that the inspected is in violation of the
laws based on the inspection report and in consideration of comments made by the inspected, proper
action shall be taken in accordance with the laws. Those seized articles, which need not be kept in
custody, shall be returned.
Article 42
Compensation claims made under Articles 27 or 28 of the Act shall be limited to those claims resulting
from any illegal acts conducted with injuries occurring both after implementation of the Act.
Article 43
After accepting a request made by a data subject under Para. 1, Article 31 of the Act and deeming that
the request is illegal or without merit the supervising authority of a public institution shall dismiss the
request with reasons stated or, if deeming the request is proper, order said public institution to make
corrections as requested by the data subject within a deadline specified by the data subject as notified
thereof.
Article 44
The "public welfare organizations" referred to in Para. 3, Article 42 of the Act shall mean the public
welfare associations, foundations, other special forms of associations, and non-juridical entities approved
by the central competent authorities having the primary jurisdiction over the enterprises concerned, which
are organized under the Civil Code or other special laws and ordinances to engage in public welfare
activities relating to said type of personal data.
Article 45
A private entity already engaging in the collection or computerized processing of personal data before the
promulgation and implementation of the Act and who having applied registration or permission in
accordance with the Act, having told the same to the data subject, and who expresses no objections
thereto, may continue to collect or process by computer said personal data within the period prescribed in
Para. 1, Article 43 of the Act. Article 46 These Rules shall come into force as of the date of promulgation.
Last Updated: January 10, 1999