SWEDEN DATA ACT OF 1 MAY 1973

INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Section 1
For the purpose of this Act
Personal information means information concerning an individual,
Personal register means any register or any other notes made by auto­
matic data processing (ADP) and containing personal information
that can be assigned to the individual concerned,
Individual registered means an individual in respect of whom personal
information occurs in a personal register,
Responsible keeper of a register means anyone for whose activity ADP
is being carried out, if the register is at his disposal.

PERMISSION ETC.

Section 2
A personal register may not be started or kept without permission
by the Data Inspection Board.
The first paragraph of this Section does not apply to personal
registers established according to a decision by King or Parliament.
Before such a decision is taken the Data Inspection Board shall be
heard.

Section 3
The Data Inspection Board shall grant permission to start and
keep a personal register, if there is no reason to assume that, with
due observance of the regulations laid down pursuant to sections 5
and 6, undue encroachment on the privacy of individuals will arise.
At the appraisal whether undue encroachment may arise special
attention should be given to the kind and quantity of personal
information meant to be included in the register and to the attitude
towards the register shown or expected from the individuals meant
to be registered.

Section 4
Permission to start and keep a personal register containing
information that anyone is suspected of or convicted for a crime or
has served a sentence or paid other consequences of a crime or has
been subjected to coercive action under the Child Welfare Act, the
Temperance Act, the Act on Provision of Psychiatric Treatment in
Detention in Certain Cases, the Act on Care of Certain Mentally
Retarded Persons, the Act on Measures in Cases of Asociality or
Danger to the Public or the Foreigners Act may not be granted to a
person other than an authority which is by law or statute responsible
for keeping a record of such information, unless there are extra­
ordinary reasons for this.
Permission to start and keep a personal register otherwise con­
taining information about anybody’s illness or state of health or
information that anybody has received social assistance, treatment
for alcoholism or the like, or has been the subject of proceedings
under the Child Welfare Act or the Foreigners Act, may not be
granted to a person other than an authority which is by law or
statute responsible for keeping a record of such information, unless
there are special reasons for this.
Permission to start and keep a personal register containing infor­
mation about anybody’s political or religious views may be granted
only where there are special reasons. This shall not, however, apply
to a personal register that an association wants to keep of its own
members.

Section 5
When granting a permission to start and keep a personal register
the Data Inspection Board shall issue regulations as to the purpose
of the register and the personal information that may be included.
If there are special reasons the permission may be limited to certain
time.

Section 6
If permission is granted to start and keep a personal register, the
Data Inspection Board shall, insofar as is needed to prevent danger
for undue encroachment on privacy, issue regulations concerning
1. the obtaining of information to the personal register,
2. the carrying out of the ADP,
3. the technical equipment,
4. the adaptation of personal information that may be made
through ADP,
5. information to the persons affected,
6. what personal information may be made accessible,
7. the issuance of personal information to others and other use
thereof,
8. the keeping and selection of information,
9. control and security.
Regulations regarding issuance of personal information may not
restrict the duties of authorities under the Freedom of the Press Act.
Section 7
What has been stated in sections 5 and 6 about the duty of the
Data Inspection Board to issue regulations also applies to personal
registers referred to in section 2, second paragraph, if regulations
have not been given by King or Parliament.

THE DUTIES OF THE RESPONSIBLE KEEPER OF THE REGISTER

Section 8
If there is reason to suspect that personal information in a per­
sonal register is incorrect, the responsible keeper of the register shall,
without delay, take the necessary steps to ascertain the correctness
of the information and, if needed, to correct it or exclude it from the
register.
If a piece of information, that is corrected or excluded, has been
handed over to a person other than the individual registered, the
responsible keeper of the register shall, at the request of the indivi­
dual registered, notify the receiver concerning the correction or the
exclusion. If there are special reasons the Data Inspection Board
may exempt the responsible keeper of the register from his duty to
notify.

Section 9
If in a personal register there is personal information which must,
with regard to the purpose of the register, be regarded as incom­
plete, or if a personal register which constitutes a record of persons
lacks information of a person who with regard to the purpose of the
register must be expected to be included in it, the responsible keeper
of the register ought to supplement what is needed. Such supple­
mentary addition shall always be made, if the incompleteness may
cause undue encroachment on privacy or risk of loss of rights.

Section 10
At the request of an individual registered the responsible keeper
of the register shall as soon as possible inform him of the personal
information concerning him in the register. When an individual
registered has been thus informed, new information need not be
given to him until twelve months later.
Information according to the first paragraph of this section shall
be given free of charge. If there are special reasons the Data Inspec­
tion Board may, concerning a certain kind of personal information,
permit a fee.
The provision of the first paragraph does not apply to information
which, pursuant to law or statute or the decision of an authority,
may not be delivered to the individual registered.

Section 11
Personal information in a personal register may not be issued if
there is reason to assume that the information will be used for ADP
contrary to this Act. If there is reason to believe that personal
information will be used for ADP abroad the information may be
issued only after permission by the Data Inspection Board. Such
permission may be given only if there is ground to believe that the
issuance will not cause undue encroachment on privacy. Concerning
prohibition of issuance from authorities of personal information
regulations are given in the Act on Restrictions of the Right to
obtain Public Documents.

Section 12
Should a responsible keeper of a register cease to keep a personal
register the Data Inspection Board must be notified. The Data
Inspection Board shall prescribe how the register should be dealt
with.

Section 13
The responsible keeper of a personal register and any other person
who has concerned himself with it may not without authorisation
reveal what he has learnt from it about the personal circumstances
of an individual.
If personal information has been issued in accordance with such
regulations given pursuant to section 6 or 18 that limit the right of
the receiver to pass it on, the receiver or any person who in his
activity has dealt with the information may not without authorisa­
tion reveal what he has learnt about the personal circumstances of an
individual.

Section 14
Information from an ADP recording, that is used by an authority
for the purpose of judicial or administrative proceedings, shall be
added to the relevant file in readable form, if special reasons do not
speak in favour of an exception.

SUPERVISION ETC.

Section 15
The Data Inspection Board supervises that ADP does not cause
undue encroachment on privacy.
The supervision shall be executed in such a way that it does not
cause greater costs or inconvenience than is necessary.

Section 16
For the purpose of its supervision the Data Inspection Board shall
be granted admission to premises where ADP is carried out or
where computers or equipment or recordings for ADP are kept.
Moreover, the Data Inspection Board shall have access to docu­
ments relating to ADP and may make arrangements for operating
the computers.

Section 17
The responsible keeper of a register shall deliver to the Data
Inspection Board the information and particulars concerning the
ADP which the Board requires for its supervision. What is now said
also applies to anyone who handles a personal register on behalf of
the responsible keeper of the register.

Section 18
If the keeping of a personal register has caused undue encroach­
ment on privacy or if there is reason to believe that such encroach­
ment will appear the Data Inspection Board may, insofar as needed,
alter regulations given before or issue new regulations of the kind
referred to in sections 5 or 6. With regard to registers referred to in
section 2, second paragraph, the Data Inspection Board may take
those steps only if they are not contrary to decisions taken by King
or Parliament. If protection against undue encroachment on privacy
cannot be attained by other means, the Board may cancel a given
permit.

Section 19
Any person who has dealt with matters concerning permission or
supervision under this Act at the Data Inspection Board may not
without authorisation reveal what he has learnt about the personal
circumstances of an individual or about professional or business
secrets.

PENALTIES AND DAMAGES ETC.

Section 20
Any person who wilfully or by negligence
1. starts or keeps a personal register without permission under
this Act, when such permission is required,
2. offends against a regulation issued pursuant to sections 5, 6
or 18,
3. issues personal information in violation of section 11,
4. offends against the provisions of sections 12 or 13,
5. gives incorrect information when fulfilling an obligation to
inform as stated in section 10,
6. gives incorrect information in a case referred to in section 17,
or
7. offends against the provisions of section 19,
shall be sentenced to a fine or to a term of imprisonment not exceed­
ing one year.
Public prosecution for an offence against sections 13 or 19 may be
instituted only if the person aggrieved requests this or prosecution is
called for from a public point of view.
Section 21
Any person who, without authorisation, effects access to record­
ings for ADP or unduly alters or obliterates such information or
includes it in a register will be sentenced for data trespass to pay a
fine or a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years, if the
perpetration is not punishable by the Penal Code.
Attempt or preparation of a crime referred to in the first para­
graph of this section will be punished according to 23rd Chapter of
the Penal Code. When the offence, if completed, would have been
considered trivial, nobody may be convicted under this paragraph.
Section 22
If a personal register has been started or kept without permission,
though such a permission is needed, the register will be forfeit, if
that is not manifestly unreasonable.

Section 23
If an individual registered suffers damage because a personal
register contains incorrect information about him the responsible
keeper of the register shall pay compensation to him. When judging
if damage has been caused and assessing the compensation the
suffering inflicted and other circumstances of other than a purely
pecuniary significance shall be taken into consideration.
