SPAIN

ORGANIC LAW 5/1992, OF OCTOBER 29 , REGULATING THE
AUTOMATED PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA . _

Title I
General provisions

Article 1. Purpose.

The purpose of this Organic Law , pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4 of

article 18 of the Constitution, is to limit the use of computers and other
techniques and means for the automated processing of personal data _ _ _

with a view to guaranteeing the honour, personal and family privacy of natural persons ,
as well as the full exercise of their rights.

Article 2. Scope .

1. This Act applies to personal data stored in _ _ _
public and private sector automated files , as well as any use _ _
subsequent , even non - automated , personal data recorded on a

material support such as to allow automated processing . _

2. The personal data protection regime provided for in this _ _

law does not apply :
a) To automated files of public ownership and whose purpose , in accordance with the law,

is to store data to make it generally public .
b ) To files kept by natural persons for purposes exclusively _

personal.

I

c ) To files containing technological or commercial information
reproducing data already published in bulletins , newspapers or directories _ _ _

officials.
d ) Legal computer files accessible to the public , insofar as they are

only reproduce provisions or court decisions already published in _ _ _ _ _ _
newspapers or in official directories .
e ) Files maintained by political parties , trade unions , churches ,
denominations and religious communities , provided that the data only concerns _ _
their associates , or members and former members , without prejudice to the transfer of
data, under the terms of article 11 of this law, except that, taking into account the data
personal data contained therein , the provisions of Article 7 would apply.

3. Are subject to the rules contained in the specific provisions the

re:

a) Files covered by the legislation on the electoral system .
b ) Files subject to the provisions on classified materials .
c) Files from the Civil Status Register and the Criminal Record .

d ) Files created for exclusively statistical purposes and covered by the Law _
12/1989, of May 9 , of the Official Statistical Service , without prejudice to the provisions of

section 36.

e ) Automated files whose purpose is to store data contained in _ _
personal relationships governed by article 68 of Law 17/1989 , of July 19 , of

Regulation of the Professional Military Personnel Regime .

Section 3. Definitions. For the purposes of this Act :

a ) " personal data " means any information relating to

natural persons , identified or identifiable;
b ) " automated file " means any organized set of personal data

personal subject to automated processing , regardless of the form of their _ _
creation , storage , organization and access to them ; _

c) " data processing " means any set of operations and procedures

technical, automated or not, allowing the collection, recording, storage ,
the development, modification , blocking and deletion, as well as the transfer of
data resulting from communications , consultations , interconnections and _

transfers;
d) "responsible for the file" means the natural or legal person of a public nature

or private, and the administrative body deciding on the purpose, content and use of the

treatment;

e) " data subject" means the natural person who is the holder of the data
the purpose of the processing within the meaning of sub-paragraph c) of this article;

f) " anonymization procedure" means any processing of personal data

made in such a way that the resulting information cannot be associated with a person
determined or determinable.

Title II

Principles of data protection _ _

Article 4. Data quality .

1. Personal data is only collected for the purpose of processing _ _ _

automated or subjected to such processing only when they are adequate, relevant and not
excessive in relation to the area and the legitimate purposes for which they were
obtained.

Only criteria that do not allow illegal practices can be used to 
data classification . 

2. Personal data subject to automated processing shall not 
are not used for purposes other than those for which the data was 
collected.

3. The data must be accurate and kept up to date so that it corresponds
really with the real situation of the person concerned.

4. If stored personal data proves to be inaccurate in whole or in
in part, or incomplete , they are erased , and rectified or completed data are
automatically substituted , without prejudice to the faculties that article 15 grants to persons

concerned.

5. Personal data is erased when it is no longer _ _
necessary or relevant for the purpose for which they were requested and _

recorded.

Data is only stored in such a way as to identify the person concerned for
a period not exceeding the time necessary for the purposes for which they were
requested or recorded.

Implementing regulations set the procedure for deciding on the conservation _

integral of data determined in exceptional cases , taking into account the values
history relating thereto in accordance with the specific legislation .

6. The data must be stored in such a way as to allow the exercise of the right

access by the data subject .

7. The collection of data by fraudulent , unfair or illicit means is
prohibited.

Article 5. Right to information when collecting data . _

1. The data subjects to whom personal data are _ _
requested must be informed in advance , expressly , precisely and not

equivocal, on:

a ) the existence of an automated file of personal data , the purpose
their collection and the recipients of the information ;

(b) the mandatory or optional nature of their response to the questions asked;

(c) the consequences of obtaining the data or refusing to provide them ;

d) the possibility of exercising the rights of access, rectification and erasure;
e) the identity and address of the person responsible for the file.

2. When questionnaires or other forms are used for data collection _
of the data, the requirements set out in the previous paragraph must appear therein in such a way
clearly legible.

3. The information referred to in paragraph 1 is not necessary if its content results
clearly of the nature of the personal data requested or the circumstances in
which the data is requested.

Article 6. Consent of the data subject .

1. Automated processing of personal data may only take place _ _ _ _

if the person concerned has given his consent , unless the law provides otherwise .

2. Consent is not required when the data is collected from _
sources accessible to the public, when collected for the purpose of carrying out the
functions relating to public administrations within the framework of their competences, nor

when the data concerns persons linked by a commercial relationship , a
employment relationship , an administrative relationship or by contract , provided that the data
are necessary to ensure the maintenance of relations or the performance of the contract.

3. The consent referred to in this article may be revoked where one exists .
justification and if no retroactive effect is attributed to it .

Article 7. Data benefiting from special protection .

1. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of article 16 of the Constitution,

no one can be forced to declare their ideology , religion or beliefs . _

When, with regard to the data referred to above , the consent referred to in
the following paragraph is requested, the person concerned must be informed of his right not to
give consent .

2. Personal data revealing ideology , religion or beliefs _ _ _

beliefs are subject to automated processing only if the data subject has given _
his express consent in writing.

3. Personal data concerning racial origin , health and life _ _ _ _

information are only requested, automatically processed and communicated when , for
for reasons of general interest a law has so provided , or if the person concerned consents thereto

expressly.

4. Files whose sole purpose is to store personal data _ _ _ _ _
personal revealing ideology , religion , beliefs , racial origin or sex life

are prohibited.

5. Personal data concerning the commission of offenses 
criminal or administrative are only included in automated files of 

Competent public administrations and in the cases provided for by the provisions

applicable.

Article 8. Health data .

Without prejudice to the provisions of article 11 relating to the transfer of data, the
institutions and health centers , public and private, as well as the professionals concerned ,

may automatically process personal health data of

persons requesting their services or requiring their medical treatment , 

in accordance with the provisions of articles 8, 10, 23 and 61 of Law 14/1986, of April 25 ,
general health ; 85.5 , 96 and 98 of Law 25/1990, of December 20 , on medicine; 2,
3 and 4 of Organic Law 3/1986 , of April 14 , of special health measures 

public and other health laws .

Article 9. Data security .

1. The person responsible for the file takes technical and organizational measures in order to

to ensure the security of personal data and to prevent their alteration ,
loss, or their unauthorized treatment or access , taking into account the state of technology ,

the nature of the data stored and the potential risks arising either from the action of
man either from the physical or natural environment .

2. Personal data is only stored in files _ _ _ _
automated only in accordance with the conditions to be set by the implementing regulations in

with regard to their integrity and security and the integrity and security of the data centers
processing , premises , equipment , systems and software .

3. Implementing regulations lay down the formalities and conditions which must _

be filled in by the automated files containing the data covered by the article

7, as well as by the persons in charge of the operations to be carried out within the framework of the
automated processing of said data.

Article 10. Duty of secrecy.

The person responsible for the automated file and persons acting at any stage
of the processing of personal data are obliged to maintain secrecy _ _

professional and to preserve it , even after termination of their relationship with the holder of the
automated file or, where appropriate , with the person responsible for the file.

Article 11. Transfer of data.

1. Personal data subject to automated processing shall not _ _ _

are transferred only to accomplish purposes directly related to the legitimate functions _ _ _
of the transferor and the transferee, provided that the person concerned has given his consent.

2. The consent required in the previous paragraph is not necessary:

(a) where a law provides otherwise ;

(b) in the case of data collected from publicly available sources ;
c) when the establishment of the automated file stems from the free acceptance and

legitimacy of a legal relationship , the development, execution and control of which involve
necessarily the connection of the file with files of third parties, the assignment not being

legitimate in this case only insofar as it is limited to the purpose which justifies it ; _
d) when the data is transferred to the Defender of the People, the Public Ministry , the
Judges or Courts of Justice , within the framework of their functions ; _ _

e ) when the data is transferred by Public Administrations in the cases
provided for in section 19;

f ) when the transfer of personal data concerning health is _ _
necessary to deal with an emergency situation , the solution of which includes access to a

automated file , or to carry out epidemiological studies within the meaning of article 8 of

Law 14/1986, of April 4 , general health .

3. Consent Is Void Where Not Given for a Specific Assignee _ _
or determinable or if the purpose of the consented assignment is not clearly established .

4. Consent to transfer personal data is also _ _ _ _

revocable.

5. The assignee of the personal data undertakes by virtue of the assignment _

compliance with the provisions of this Law .

6. If the assignment is made after the anonymization procedure , the provisions of the

preceding paragraphs are not applicable .

Title III
Rights of persons

Article 12. Opposition to assessments based exclusively on automated data . _

The data subject may object to administrative or private decisions _
implying an assessment of his behavior based solely on processing _
automated processing of personal data giving a definition of the characteristics or

of the personality of the person concerned.

Article 13. Right to information.

Any person may know, and request to this effect from the General Register

of Data Protection the relevant information , the existence of automated files of
personal data , their purposes and the identity of the person responsible for the file. There
Consultation of the General Register is public and free.

Article 14. Right of access.

1. The data subject has the right to request and obtain information about _

his personal data contained in automated files . _ _

2. The information is obtained by means of the only consultation of the files using

displaying the data, or by means of the communication of the data made in writing ,

by means of copy, fax or photocopy, certified true or not, in a legible and

intelligible, the use of conventional codes being permitted only if the interpretation can
be made without the aid of specific mechanical devices .

3. The right of access referred to in this article shall only be exercised at intervals whose

duration does not exceed twelve months , unless the data subject demonstrates an interest _ _
legit. In this case, the right can be exercised before.

Article 15. Right of rectification and erasure.

1. Implementing regulations determine the term in which the person responsible for the file

is bound to fulfill the obligation to make effective the exercise of the right of rectification

or erasure by the data subject .

2. Personal data that proves to be inaccurate or incomplete are _
rectified or deleted, as appropriate .

3.

If rectified or erased data has been transferred previously , the

responsible for the file must communicate its rectification or deletion to the assignee.

4. The data will not be erased if their erasure would harm interests _ _
legitimate interests of the affected person or third parties, or where there is an obligation to

retain data .

5. Personal data is kept for the time provided for by _ _
the applicable provisions or, where applicable , by the contractual relationships binding the person

or the entity responsible for the file and the person affected.

Article 16. Access procedure .

1. Implementing regulations lay down the procedure for exercising the right of access ,

as well as for the exercise of the right of rectification and erasure.

2. No compensation is permitted for the rectification or erasure of
personal data . _

Article 17. Protection of rights and damages.

1. Data subjects may contact the Data Protection Agency for _

all complaints against acts contrary to the provisions of this Law , by means of
the procedure to be established for this purpose by implementing regulations .

2. A contentious-administrative appeal against the decisions of the Agency is open
of Data Protection .

3. Data subjects whose property has been damaged or whose rights _ _ _ _
have been harmed as a result of the non -compliance with the provisions of this Law by the

responsible for the file are entitled to compensation for damages .

4. In the case of files with public owners , the responsibility arises
in accordance with the legislation concerning the liability of Public Administrations .

5. In the case of files with private owners , the action for liability is brought

in the courts of the judiciary .

Title IV
Sectoral provisions

Chapter I

Files in public ownership

Article 18. Establishment, modification and deletion.

1. Automated files of Public Administrations are only established , modified
or deleted only by means of a regulatory act published in the "Boletm Oficial del

Estado" or in the corresponding official gazette .

2. Regulatory acts establishing or modifying files include : _

a) The purpose of the file and the intended uses .
b) The persons or populations on which the collection of data to be
personal character is envisaged or who are obliged to provide them .

c ) The procedure for collecting personal data . _ _

d) The basic structure of the automated file and the categories of data to be

personal character contained therein . 

e ) The planned transfers of personal data , if any .

f) The administrative bodies responsible for the automated file .
g) The services or units in which the rights of access, rectification and

erasure are exercised.

3. Regulatory acts enacted to delete automated files _ _
provide for the subsequent destination of these or, where applicable , the requirements concerning

their destruction.

Article 19. Transfer of data between Public Administrations .

1. Personal data collected or processed by Administrations
public authorities for the exercise of their powers are not ceded to other

Public administrations for the exercise of different competences or _ _
competences concerning different matters , except when the transfer has been provided for by

the regulatory act establishing the file or by subsequent rules , of the same rank or

of a higher rank , dealing with the use of data.

2. Personal data obtained or processed by Administrations _ _ _ _
to other Public Administrations may in any case be subject to _
of the assignment.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 11.2.b ) , data collected from sources

accessible to the public are transferred to files with private owners only with the consent
of the person concerned or if the law provides otherwise .

Article 20. Files of the Security Forces and Bodies .

1. The automated files established by the Security Forces and Bodies and _ _
containing personal data collected for administrative purposes and intended 
to permanent registration , are subject to the general regime of this Law.

2. The collection and automated processing of personal data for purposes 

police purposes made by the Security Forces and Bodies without the consent of the 

affected persons are limited to cases and categories of data that are 
necessary for the prevention of a real danger to public security or the repression of 
criminal offences . The data must be stored in specific files established _
for this purpose , and classified according to their degree of reliability.

3. The data referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 7 are only collected and

processed by the Security Forces and Bodies only in cases where the collection and 
processing is absolutely necessary for the purposes of a particular investigation .

4. Personal data stored for police purposes is deleted _ _ _
when they are no longer necessary for the purposes of the investigations for which they were

recorded.

To this end , the age of the affected person and the _ _
categories of the stored data , the need to keep the data until the conclusion

of a specific investigation or prosecution , the pronouncement of a final decision and

including acquittal , pardon , pardon and limitation of liability .

Article 21. Derogations from the rights of access, rectification and erasure.

1. Those responsible for files containing data referred to in paragraphs 2 , 3 and

4 of the previous article may refuse access , rectification or erasure depending
any dangers that may result therefrom for the security of the State or the security

public, the protection of the rights and freedoms of others or the needs of investigations in
course.

2. The persons in charge of the files of the Tax Administration can also
refuse the exercise of the rights referred to in the previous paragraph when their exercise is

likely to encroach on the administrative operations ensuring the payment of


tax obligations and, in any case, if the person concerned is the subject of an investigation of
the Finance Inspectorate .

3. The data subject having been refused the exercise of the rights referred to in the
previous paragraphs may submit a complaint to the Director of the Agency for the Protection of

Data, or of the competent body of the respective Autonomous Community if it is
automated files held by Police Corps of the Autonomous Community or 
by the tax authorities thereof . _ The Director ensures their validity .

Article 22. Other Derogations from the Rights of Affected Persons .

1. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 5 do not apply to the collection

data when informing the data subject interferes with the performance of the _
functions of control and verification of Public Administrations or renders the execution thereof

seriously difficult , or affects National Defense , Public Security or Law Enforcement

criminal or administrative offences .

2. The provisions of Article 14 and Article 15 do not apply if _
the assessment of the interests of the parties concerned reveals that the rights deriving from said

arrangements for those affected must yield to the public interest or to _ _ _

prevailing interests of third parties. The administrative body responsible for the automated file

invokes the provisions of this paragraph only if he justifies the reasons therefor and if he informs the
data subject of his or her right to file with the Director of the Protection Agency

Data or, where appropriate , the competent body of the Autonomous Communities a
complaint against the refusal of the exercise.

Chapter Q

Private Owner Files _

Article 23. Establishment.

Automated files with private owners and containing personal data _ _ _

personnel may be established when necessary to accomplish the activity or purpose _
legitimacy of the person , company or entity holder and that the guarantees provided _
by this law for the protection of persons are respected.

Article 24. Notification and registration of files.

1. Natural or legal persons using automated files _ _ _ _
of personal data notify the Agency of this in advance . _ _ _
Data Protection .

2. Implementing regulations establish the information to be included in the

notification. The information on the files must mention the _
responsible , purpose , location , category of personal data that _ _
are contained therein , the security measures , as well as, where applicable , the transfers of data

of a personal nature considered.

3. Any changes to the purpose , manager and location of the file _

are communicated to the Data Protection Agency .

4. The General Data Protection Register only registers files _ _
automated only if the notification complies with the required formalities .

If the notification is not in conformity, the Registry may have it supplemented or rectified

the information.

5. If after filing the application for registration of the file a month has passed
and that no decision has been notified by the Data Protection Agency , the file

automated is deemed to be recorded for all purposes.

Article 25. Communication of the transfer of data.

1. When the data is first transferred , the person responsible for the file informs
the persons concerned and indicates the purpose, as well as the categories of data transferred
and the name and address of the assignee.

2. The obligation referred to in the previous paragraph does not exist in the cases provided for in
paragraphs 2, letters c), d) and e), and 6, of article 11, as well as in the cases in which the transfer is

imposed by law .

Article 26. Data on subscribers to telecommunications services . _ _ _

The numbers of telephones and other telecommunications services , as well as
additional data may be in publicly available repositories , but _

the data subject may request its exclusion.

Article 27. Provision of automated personal data processing services _ _ _ _

1. Those who , on behalf of third parties , provide processing services
automated personal data may not apply or use for any purpose _ _ _

different from those appearing in the service contract the resulting data , _ _ _
or assign them , even for the purpose of conservation.

2. After performance of the contractual service , the data to be
personal character that have been processed are destroyed. If the master of the contract gives

the express authorization with a view to reasonably probable subsequent contracts , the data

can be stored for a period of five years , under satisfactory conditions in
regarding data security . _ _ _

Article 28. Provision of credit and credit information services . _ _ _

1. Anyone who provides credit and credit information services shall not _ _ _

may automatically process personal data only if the data has been _ _ _
obtained from publicly available sources or derived from information provided by the
data subject or with their consent. Personal data may _ _ _

be processed if they relate to the performance or non -performance of obligations to pay

sums of money and whether they were provided by the creditor or by persons acting _

on their behalf or in their interest. In these cases the data subjects on whom

data has been recorded in automated files receive within _ _ _ _ _
thirty days from the recording of the data a notification containing a statement
recorded data and information about their right to request information about _ _

all data recorded, in accordance with the provisions of this law.

2. The person responsible for the file communicates to the person concerned, on request,
all data and all evaluations and assessments that have been transferred within six months _
antecedents, as well as the name and address of the assignee.

3. Only personal data which may _ _ _ _ _ _ _
to be decisive in assessing the economic solvency of the persons concerned ,

provided that the data being adverse goes back to a period not exceeding six years.

Article 29. Files for advertising purposes .

1. Anyone who collects addresses or distributes documents , or exercises _

advertising or direct selling activities or other similar activities , uses lists _ _
processed automatically containing names and addresses or other personal data _

when the data appear in documents accessible to the public or when they have been
provided by the data subjects or have been obtained with their consent .

2. Data subjects have the right to know the origin of their data
personal character , as well as to be removed from the automated file , immediately and without

deadline , and to have all the information concerning them recorded there erased .

Article 30. Files relating to investigations or research .

1. Personal data is only used in opinion polls , _ _ _

market studies , scientific or medical research , and in other activities _
analogous, only if the person concerned has freely given his consent to this effect.

2. The personal data processed automatically within the framework _ _
of said activities may not be used for a different purpose or transferred in such a way as to

can be put in touch with a specific person .

Article 31. Type codes .

1. Those responsible for files held by private owners may , through sectoral agreements

consultation or by company decisions , draft standard codes regulating _ _ _

organizational conditions , operating systems , procedures , standards _ _
of safety concerning the environment, the software or the materials, the obligations of the
persons responsible for the processing and use of personal information , as well as
the guarantees provided in their respective fields with regard to the exercise of the rights

of persons , while fully respecting the principles and provisions of this _ _
Law and its implementing regulations .

The above codes may contain specific operational rules of each _
system as well as technical application standards .

If business rules or application standards are not integrated into _ _ _
the code , instructions or orders in fixing the use must respect the principles
code .

2. Model codes are codes of ethics or good practice _ _
professional and must be filed or registered in the General Register for the Protection of
Data. Registration may be refused when the General Register for the Protection of
Data considers that they do not comply with legal and regulatory provisions

applicable. In this case, the Director may order the interested parties to make the
corrections.

Title V
International data movement _

Article 32. General rule .

Personal data which has undergone automated processing or _ _ _ _
collected with a view to being subjected to such processing cannot be transferred as _

temporary or permanent to countries whose level of data protection cannot be _ _ _ _ _

pari passu with the level of this Law , except where the provisions of this Law are
complied with and if the prior authorization of the Director of the Data Protection Agency
has been obtained. Authorization is given only if adequate guarantees are obtained .

Article 33. Exceptions.

The provisions of the previous article do not apply :

a ) where the international transfer of personal data results from _

the application of treaties or conventions to which Spain is a party,
b) where the transfer of data is made for the purpose of filing or executing

requests for international legal assistance ,
c ) when the purpose of the transfer is to exchange medical data between
doctors or between health institutions and when the medical care of the person _ _ _

concerned or epidemiological research of diseases or onsets _ _

of epidemics require the exchange of data,
d ) when the transfer concerns remittances , in accordance with the legislation

applies.

Title VI

Data Protection Agency _ _

Article 34. Nature and legal regime .

1. The Data Protection Agency is created .

2. The Data Protection Agency is a body governed by public law with the
of legal personality and capable of all legal acts , public and private . She
does not exercise its functions under any constraint of the Public Administrations . She is governed

by the provisions of this Law, by the provisions of a statute to be issued by the
Government, as well as by the provisions applicable in accordance with article 6-5 of
the General Budget Law .

3. The Data Protection Agency exercises its functions in accordance with the Law
of the Administrative Procedure , except that this Law or the implementing regulations

contain specific provisions . It acquires goods and enters into contracts _
in accordance with common law .

4. The workstations of the bodies and services integrating the Protection Agency _ _

of the Data are occupied by civil servants of the Public Administrations or by
contractual staff , depending on the nature of the tasks of each workstation . These
personal are obliged to maintain the secrecy of the personal data that they _
know in the performance of their duties.

5. The following assets and economic resources are assigned to the Agency for
Data protection in order to ensure the fulfillment of its purposes :

a) transfers to be included each year in the General State Budget ;
b) goods and securities forming part of its patrimony, as well as their products and
income;

c ) other property and resources allocated to it in accordance with the law.

6. The Data Protection Agency draws up and annually approves the prior
draft Budget and forwards it to the Government with a view to integrating it separately into the

General State Budget .

Article 35. The Director.

1. The Director of the Data Protection Agency manages the Agency and exercises _
the representation. He is appointed, among the members of the Consultative Council , by Decree
Royal, for a period of four years.

2. H performs his duties with full independence and objectivity and is not _

not subject to guidelines regarding exercise . _ _ _ _

3. The Director of the Data Protection Agency is not discharged _ _ _
before the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 1, only upon request, by resolution passed by

the Government after investigation, heard the other members of the Advisory Council , for

serious non-observance of his obligations, for incapacity arising for the exercise of his
functions, for incompatibility or in the event of a criminal conviction for an intentional offence .

4. The Director of the Data Protection Agency has the quality of high _
authority.

Article 36. Functions.

The functions of the Data Protection Agency consist of :

a ) ensuring compliance with and monitoring data protection legislation _ _ _

the application, in particular with regard to the rights of information, access ,

rectification and erasure of data,
b ) give all authorizations provided for by law or in regulations
application thereof ,

c) give, where appropriate , and without prejudice to the powers of other bodies,
all instructions with a view to ensuring the adequacy of automated processing with the principles

of this Law ,
d) receive all requests and complaints filed by data subjects ,
e ) instruct all persons of their rights with regard to the processing

automated personal data , _ _
f ) order the cessation of all processing of personal data and the _
deletion of all files if they do not comply with the provisions of this Law ,

g) exercise the power to sanction, in accordance with the provisions of Part VII

of this Law ,
h ) be consulted on all draft implementing regulations of the _

this Law,


i) ask those responsible for the files for any collaboration and information
likely in his opinion to be necessary for the performance of his duties,

j ) to publicize the existence of automated personal data files _ _

personnel and to this end periodically publish statements containing all the _ _
additional information that the Director of the Agency will decide,
k) draw up an annual report and submit it to the Ministry of Justice ,
l ) provide oversight of all international movements of data and _

give all authorizations relating thereto , as well as ensure international cooperation
with regard to the protection of personal data , _ _

m) ensure compliance with the provisions of the law on the public statistics service

concerning the collection of statistical data and statistical secrecy , and give all the
instructions, advise on the security of files created for the sole purpose of statistics and
exercise the power provided for in Article 45,

n ) exercise all the functions attributed to it by laws or regulations .

Article 37. Advisory Council .

The Director of the Data Protection Agency is assisted by a Board _
Advisory with the following composition :

- A deputy, proposed by the Congress of Deputies.

- A senator, proposed by the respective Chamber .
- A representative of the central Administration , appointed by the Government.

- A representative of the Municipal Administration , proposed by the Federation

Spanish for Communes and Provinces .
- A member of the Royal Academy of History, proposed by the latter.
- An expert in the subject, proposed by the High Council of Universities.

- A representative of users and consumers , chosen in accordance with
application regulations .
- A representative of the Autonomous Communities , whose proposal is made to the
means of the procedure to be fixed by implementing regulations .

- A representative of the private files sector , whose proposal is made to the

means of the procedure to be fixed by implementing regulations .

Implementing regulations set the operating procedure of the Board _
Advisory.

Article 38. The General Data Protection Register . _

1. The General Data Protection Register is created , as an integrated body _

in the Data Protection Agency .

2. The following are registered in the General Data Protection Register :

a ) Automated files whose holders are Public Administrations . _

b) Automated files with private ownership .
c) The authorizations provided for in this Law .
d) The type codes provided for in Article 31 of this Law .
e) The data necessary to exercise the rights of information, access ,

rectification and erasure.

3. Implementing regulations set the procedure for entering in the Register _

general of Data Protection the files with public holder and those with private holder and _
determine the content, modification and cancellation of registrations , as well as the
procedure for complaints and appeals against the corresponding resolutions and _ _

any other related matters .

Article 39. Power of inspection.

1. The Data Protection Agency may inspect files subject to _ _

of this Law and request all the information required to perform its task .

To this end, it may request the exhibition or delivery of all documents and

data and examine them on site. It can inspect the hardware and software used

in the processing of data and enter the premises where they are installed .

2. The officials responsible for the inspection tasks referred to above shall have the capacity

of authority while carrying out their mission.

They are obligated to keep secret all the information they know in _ _
exercise of the said functions, even after having been relieved of them .

Article 40. Competent bodies of the Autonomous Communities .

1. The functions which, in accordance with the provisions of Article 36 , correspond

to the Data Protection Agency may be exercised by bodies of the _
Autonomous Communities benefiting from appropriate guarantees of independence and
objectivity in carrying out their tasks , with regard to automated files of
personal data established or managed by each Community within the framework of _ _
its competences, with the exception of the functions provided for in sub -paragraphs j), k) and 1), as well as

in sub -paragraphs f) and g) and in Articles 45 and 48 .

2. The Autonomous Communities may create and maintain file registers _ _

public bodies with a view to exercising the powers attributed to them , with regard to the
automated personal data files of which the Autonomous Communities or their
Historical territories are the holders.

3. The Director of the Data Protection Agency may convene _
regularly the competent bodies of the Autonomous Communities for the purpose of cooperation

institutional and coordination of criteria or guidelines . _ _ _ The Director of
the Data Protection Agency and the competent bodies of the Autonomous Communities
may ask each other for all the information required to fulfill their
functions.

Article 41. Files of the Autonomous Communities concerning matters within their exclusive
competence .

1. When the Director of the Data Protection Agency finds that a

automated file pertaining to the Autonomous Communities is kept or used, within the framework

of the exclusive jurisdiction of the latter, in contravention of a provision of this Law,

he can summon the Administration concerned to take specific corrective measures _
within a time limit to be expressly set in the summons.

2. If the summons of the Director of the Data Protection Agency is not
executed by the Public Administration concerned, the Director may challenge the resolution

taken by it.

V.H. title
Offenses and Penalties

Article 42. Persons in charge.

1. Those responsible for the files are subject to the sanctions regime provided for by the

this Act.

2. In the case of files whose managers are Public Administrations _ _
the provisions of article 45 , paragraph 2, apply with regard to the procedure and the
penalties.

Article 43. Types of offences.

1. The offenses are minor, serious or very serious.

2. Offenses which consist of : _ _

a) Not to rectify or erase from files , ex officio or at the request of

persons or institutions authorized by law , errors , deficiencies or _ _ _
formal inaccuracies . _

(b) Failure to comply with instructions given by the Director of the Agency of

Data Protection or not to provide information requested by it , _
concerning non - substantial aspects of data protection . _
c ) Failing to update personal data maintained in _ _ _ _ _
automated files .
d ) All other offenses concerning formal or documentary aspects and

not capable of being qualified as a serious or very serious infringement 

3. Offenses which consist of : _ _

a ) Establish automated files in public ownership or begin the collection of
personal data in order to save them in the said files , without having _
been authorized by regulatory act published in the “Boletfn Oficial del Estado” or in

other relevant official journals .
b ) Establish private owner files , or start collecting data from _ _

personal character in order to save them in the said files, for purposes other than
than those arising from the legitimate purposes of the company or entity concerned .

c ) Collect personal data without asking for consent _ _

express data subjects in cases where consent must be requested , or _ _
without providing data subjects with the information provided for in Article 5 of this

Law.

d ) Processing personal data by automated procedures or by _ _

make subsequent use , in violation of the principles and guarantees provided for in the

this Law, or without respecting the protective rules provided for in the regulations

of application, when the facts are not likely to be qualified as offenses
very serious.
e ) Prevent or obstruct the exercise of the right of access , and refuse to provide
information requested .

f ) Maintaining inaccurate personal data or failing to make _ _ _
rectifications or deletions provided for by law if this infringes on the rights of _

persons protected by this Law .
g ) Do not keep the secret , unless the facts are not likely to be

classified as very serious offences .
h ) Maintain files , premises , software or materials containing _ _

personal data without respecting the security measures that will be set by _ _
implementing regulations .
i ) Failing to notify the Data Protection Agency _ _ _ _
provided for by this Law or by the implementing regulations , and failing to provide in a timely manner

documents or information required or requested by the Agency .
j) Obstructing the exercise of inspection functions .

4. Offenses which consist of : _ _ _

a) Collect data in a deceptive and fraudulent manner .
b ) Communicate or cede personal data outside the authorized cases . _

c ) Requesting and processing personal data using automated procedures _ _
personnel provided for in paragraph 2 of article 7, without the express consent of the person

concerned; request and process through automated procedures data provided for in _

paragraph 3 of article 7 if a law does not allow it or if the person concerned has not

given his express consent , or fail to comply with the prohibition of paragraph 4 of article
7.

d) Not putting an end to the illegitimate use of automated data processing

personal data when notified by the Director of the Agency of _ _ _ _

Data Protection or by persons with the right of access .

e ) Transfer , temporarily or permanently , personal data _ _
which have been subject to automated processing or which have been collected with a view to being submitted

to such processing, intended for countries that do not provide a comparable level of protection ,
without the prior authorization of the Director of the Data Protection Agency .

f ) Processing by automated procedures personal data of _ _ _
illegitimately or in disregard of the applicable principles and guarantees , if this prevents or

undermines the exercise of fundamental rights .
g ) Not to keep secret the personal data provided for in paragraphs _ _
2 and 3 of article 7.

Article 44. Types of sanctions.

1. Minor offenses are subject to a fine of 100,000 to 10,000,000,000
pesetas.

2. Serious offenses are subject to a fine of 10,000,001 to 50,000,000
pesetas.

3. Very serious offenses are subject to a fine of 50,000,001 to 100,000,000
of pesetas.

4. The quantum of sanctions is determined according to the nature of the rights
personnel affected , the volume of processing carried out, the profit derived therefrom , the degree
intentionality and recidivism . _

5. The Government periodically updates the quantum of sanctions by _ _

relative to changes in price indices .

Article 45. Offenses committed by Public Administrations .

1. If the offenses referred to in Article 43 are committed on files whose _

responsible are the Public Administrations , the Director of the Agency for the Protection of
Data takes a resolution ordering the measures to be adopted with a view to stopping or
to rectify the effects of the breach. The resolution is notified to the person responsible for the file,
to the body to which it belongs and to the persons concerned, where applicable .

2. The Director of the Agency may also propose disciplinary measures , if necessary
applicable. The procedure and sanctions provided for in the legislation on the disciplinary regime

Public Administrations are applicable .

3. The resolutions taken in the above cases are communicated to the Agency.

4. The Director informs the Defender of the People of all measures and resolutions

taken in application of the above provisions .

Article 46. Limitation.

1. Very serious offenses are prescribed by three years , serious ones by two years ,
and the slight ones by a year.

2. The limitation period begins to run from the day on which the infringement was
committed.

3. The statute of limitations is interrupted when the sanction procedure has been
commenced and the party concerned becomes aware of it . The prescription is reopened if the
sanction procedure remains suspended for more than six months due to non - attributable causes

to the alleged offender .

4. Sanctions imposed for very serious misconduct are time- barred after three years ,

those pronounced for serious faults by two years , and those pronounced for faults
slight by one year.

5. The limitation period for penalties begins on the day following the day _
at which the decision pronouncing the sanction has become enforceable.

6. Prescription is interrupted when the enforcement procedure has been _

commenced and the party concerned becomes aware of it . The prescription is reopened if the
enforcement proceedings remain suspended for more than six months for causes not attributable to
the perpetrator of the offence.

Article 47. Penalty procedure .

1. Implementing regulations lay down the procedure for determining infringements _
and take the sanctions provided for in this Title.

2. An administrative contentious appeal is open against the resolutions taken by
the Data Protection Agency or by the competent bodies of the Communities
autonomous.

Article 48. Power to freeze files.

In cases likely to qualify as very serious offences , and _
consisting of the unlawful use or transfer of personal data preventing _

seriously the exercise of the rights of citizens and the free development of personality
guaranteed by the Constitution and by law , the Director may exercise the power to sanction

and in addition summon those responsible for the automated personal data files _
personal, public or private holder , to put an end to the illicit use or transfer of

data. If the summons of the Director is not carried out, the Agency may order, by
justified resolution , the immobilization of the automated files with the only fms to put in
state the rights of data subjects .

First additional provision . Non- application of Titles V7 and VII.

The provisions of Titles VI and VH do not apply to files whose _
holders are the Cortes Generales, the Defender of the People, the Court of Auditors, the
General Council of the Judiciary and the Constitutional Court .

Second additional provision . Files prior to the entry into force of the law.

1. Within one year of the entry into force of this Organic Law , all

previously existing files and automated processing of personal data _ _
and included in its scope must be notified to the Agency for the Protection of
Data.

2. Within one year of the entry into force of this Organic Law , the

Public administrations responsible for already existing automated files must
approve a regulatory act establishing the file or adapt, if necessary , the act
regulations already in force.


Third additional provision . Skill of the Defender of the People.

The provisions of this Organic Law do not derogate from the competence of the

Defender of the People and similar bodies of the Autonomous Communities .

Single transitional provision . Complex adaptations to the provisions of the Act.

When the adaptation of automated files to the principles and rights provided for by
this Law includes the adoption of complex technical measures or the processing of

large volumes of data , adaptation or data processing must be carried out
within one year from the date of entry into force of the Law , subject to _
to observe, for the rest, the provisions thereof .

Single derogatory provision . Repeal of the first transitional provision of Organic Law
1/1982 .

The first transitional provision of Organic Law 1/1982 , of Civil Protection
of the right to honour , to personal and family privacy and to the image is repealed .


First final provision . Approval of application.

The Government enacts all provisions required for the application of this
Law and to regulate the organic structure of the Data Protection Agency .

Second final provision . Extending Law Enforcement to Files _ _ _ _

conventional.

The Government, on the prior opinion of the Director of the Agency for the Protection of
Data , may extend the application of this Law and make any modifications and

adaptations required, to files containing data stored in the form
conventional and which are not subject to automated processing or are not _ _ _
intended to be submitted to it .

Third final provision . Provisions having the status of ordinary law .

Articles 18, 19, 23 , 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 , 31, Titles VI and VII, the first
and second additional provisions , and the first final provision have the quality of
ordinary law .

Fourth final provision . Entry into force.

This Organic Law enters into force three months after its publication in the _
"Boletfn Oficial del Estado”.