
Norwegian Act relating to personal data registers of 9 June 1978


Chapter 1 - Scope of the Act

paragraph 1

     The Act is applicable to personal data registers and to
other facilities whereby personal information is utilised
in certain types of activities.
     The term "personal information'' shall mean information
and assessments which are directly or indirectly, traceable
to identifiable individuals, associations or foundations.
The term "personal data registers" shall mean registration
files, records etc where personal information is systematically
stored so that information concerning an individual person may
be retrieved.
     The Act is applicable to personal data registers in
central or local government institutions as well as in
private enterprise, societies or foundations.
     The King may determine that the Act shall not apply to
certain types of personal data registers.

Chapter 2 - Data Surveillance Service

paragraph 2

     There shall be established a data surveillance service.
The Data Surveillance Service shall be a separate institution
subordinate to the King and the Ministry designated by the King.

     The Data Surveillance Service shall be under the direction
of a Board; which shall consist of seven members. The members
shall be appointed by the King, who shall also nominate the
chairman and vice-chairman of the Board.
paragraph 3

     The opinion of the Data Surveillance Service shall be
obtained before decisions are adopted; which under the terms
of this Act are delegated to the King. The foregoing however
shall not apply to decisions rendered in pursuance of          
paragraph 2.                             

1 Otherwise the Data Surveillance Service shall
keep itself informed of general developments with regard
to the utilisation of personal data registers and to the
problems connected with such registers, as well as providing
information in this respect            


2 provide advice and guidance on questions relating to the
protection of the individual and data safeguards to those
who are planning to establish personal data registers.

3 ensure that the statutes, rules and regulations applicable
to personal data registers are observed, and that errors
or deficiencies are rectified

4 upon request or on its own initiative, give its opinion
on questions relating to the use of personal data registers
or on questions of a general nature relating to the
utilisation of personal information.

The King may assign additional duties to the Data
Surveillance Service concerning the use etc of personal data
registers or the utilisation of personal information otherwise,

paragraph 4
         The Data Surveillance Service shall keep a systematic
    record of personal data registers for which a government
    concession is required in pursuance of paragraph 9. The record
    shall show who is responsible for the register, what kind of
    information the register may contain and to what uses it may be
    put. The record shall refer to the rules which are otherwise
    laid down in pursuance of paragraph 11. A copy of the rules
    shall be kept with the Data Surveillance Service.

         The record and the rules shall be available to the
    general public.

         The King may issue specific rules concerning the record
    and may make such exceptions to the provisions of the first
    paragraph as are necessary for reasons of emergency preparedness
    or the security of the realm.

 paragraph 5
         The Data Surveillance Service may demand such information
    as is needed to enable it to cairy nut its duties. The
    Service may request admittance to sucn places where personal
    data registers and technical aids are located, as well as to
    undertake such tests or control checks as It a^ems necessa^'-
         The Data Surveillance Service's right to demana information
    shall not be limited by any statutory provisions concerning
    pledge of secrecy.
         The King may make such exceptions to the provisions of
    the first and second paragraphs as are necessary in consideration
    of the security of the realm. The King may also issue
    regulations concerning the reimbursement of expenses incurred
    in connection with such supervision.

Chapter 2 - General Provisions

paragraph 6
     The registration of personal information must be justified
on objective grounds, having due regard to the administrative
and operational activities of the institution or enterprise
undertaking such registration.

     Unless necessary, registration may not be undertaken in
respect of

1.   information referring to race or political or religious
     beliefs

2.   information on whether a person has been a suspect, indicted
     or convicted in a penal case,

3.   information referring to the state of health or abuse of
     intoxicants,
4.   information concernig sexual life

5.   other information concerning family affairs than those
     referring to family relationships or family status,
     property arrangements between spouses and bread-winner
     status.

paragraph 7

      Everyone shall have the right to be informed of the
information concerning himself which are stored or processed
by means of electronic aids. This right to be informed shall
nevertheless not apply to registers which are only used for
statistical research or general planning purposes. Nor does
  ie right to be informed apply to such information which it is
considered inadvisable to bring to the knowledge of the
person concerned out of regard for his health or his relations
with persons close to him.

     As regards personal data registers in central or local
government institutions, the right to be informed, as defined
in the first paragraph, shall also apply to information which
is not stored or processed by means of electronic aids,
The person so registered may not, however, demand access to
documents which are deemed to be internal documents by virtue
of paragraph 18 of the Administrative Procedures Act.

     Furthermore, as regards personal data registers in
central or local government institutions, everyone shall have
the right to be informed of the types of information which are
included in the register.

     The King may prescribe by regulation that the rules
laid down in the second and third paragraphs shall also apply
to personal data registers in private enterprise, societies
or foundations, or for certain such registers.

     The King may, by regulation or in respect of an individual
register, make additional exceptions to the right to be informed
and lay down specific rules or set conditions for the use of
such a right.                                   .

paragraph 8

      If a personal data register contains erroneous or
incomplete information, information which it is not permitted
to enter into the register, or information which is no longer
relevant, such information shall be corrected, deleted or
s pplemented if the faulty information may be of significance
for the person so registered.   If the fault has resulted in
erroneous or incomplete Information having been issued, all
possible steps shall be taken to ensure that the error does
not adversely affect the person registered.

     When there are errors as described in the first para­
graph, the Data Surveillance Service may order corrections,
deletions and supplements to be make to the register as well
as order such steps as are mentioned in the final sentence
of the first paragraph.

Chapter 4 - Duty to obtain permission for the establishment of personal data registers 

paragraph 9

     Permission of the King (government concession) is
retired for the establishment of personal data registers
which are to utilise electronic aids. Such permission is
also required for the establishment of other personal data
registers if they are to include

1.   information referring to race or political or religious
     beliefs,

2.   information on whether a person has been a suspect,
     indicted or convicted in a penal case

     information referring to the state of health or abuse
     of intoxicants

4.   information concerning sexual life

5.   other information concerning family affairs than those
     referring to family relationships or family status,
     property settlements between spouses and bread-winner
     status.

     The King may decide that certain types of personal
data registers shall be excepted from the government concession
requirement pursuant to the first paragraph. In respect of
such registers, regulations may be prescribed concerning such
circumstances as are described in paragraph 11. Other regulations
may also be prescribed in order to minimise the problems which
the register could otherwise give rise to in respect of an
individual person, inter alia rules prescribing that the
register shall be subject to control by the Data Surveillance
Service and be included in the record kept in pursuance of
paragraph 4.

     The King's powers under the first and second paragraphs
may only be delegated to the Ministry or to the Data Surveillance
Service.

     The King may issue regulations concerning security
measures for installations operating personal data registers
as referred to in the first paragraph.

paragraph 10

      When deciding whether permission shall be granted, an
assessment shall be made - within the framework laid down in
paragraph 6 - as to whether the establishment and utilisation of
the personal data register in question may cause problems for
the individual person, which cannot be solved satisfactorily
by rules prescribed under paragraph 11. If such problems are
liable to arise, due consideration shall be given as to whether
these problems are outweighed by such considerations as favour the establishment of the register.

paragraph 11

     When permission is granted in pursuance of paragraph 9,
rules shall be prescribed for the personal data register indicating
what types of information the register may contain and for
what purposes the register may be used.

      In addition, the rules shall prescribe such terms and
conditions as are relevant for the utilisation of the register
or which can minimise the disadvantages the establishment and
utilisation of the register could otherwise give rise to.
In particular consideration should be given to prescribing
rules on

1.   the collection and control of such Information as the
     register may contain

2.    the handling and storage of such information

3.   Whether sharing with another personal data register should
      be permitted

4.    use of national registration number

5.    the release of information* including the question
      whether data may be transferred to other registers

6.    the scope and content of the information to be given by
      notification or other forms of communication to the person
      registered

7.    the right of the individual person to demand information
      in accordance with paragraph 7
8.    rectifying data or routine procedures in the register
9.    keeping the system currently up-to-date              .   -

10.   the deletion or non-use of data after a certain lapse of
      time, and whether the register should be transferred to
      the general archive system

11.   security measures and destruction of data material.

     In addition the rules shall designate the institution
or enterprise or the person responsible for ensuring the proper
implementation of the rules.

paragraph 12

     The rules prescribed in paragraph 11 may not be dispensed
with except by permission of the institution prescribing the
 ules or - if the rules so prescribe - of the Ministry or the
Data Surveillance Service.

Chapter 5 - Credit and personal information services

      The term "credit information services" shall, in this
Chapter, mean activities which consist in providing information
which throws light on credit-worthiness or financial reliability
(credit information). This Chapter shall not apply to the
utilisation of information within an enterprise or in relation
to enterprises within the same corporate group. Nor does it
apply to providing information to another credit information
enterprise to which this Act applies, provided that the                  
information shall be utilised in connection with this enterprise's
own credit information service.

     The King may issue supplementary regulations on what is
to be understood by the term "credit information services".
For certain types of enterprises the King may* by regulation
or by individual decision* make exceptions to the individual
provisions in this Chapter.

 Enterprises operating credit information services may
not, save by permission of the King* operate other forms of
personal information services.

paragraph 14

     An enterprise may not start a credit information service
before the King has granted permission thereto.

     When deciding whether permission shall be granted, due
regard shall be paid to the question whether the activities
concerned may be expected to be operated in an honest and sound
manner. Within the framework of the provisions laid down in       
this Act* such terms and conditions may be prescribed in
respect of the government concession as are appropriate and
promote these aims, inter alia concerning surety in respect
of liability. As regards enterprises under the control of
foreign interests, terms and conditions may be prescribed
concerning the form of establishment and the composition of
the company's management.

paragraph 15
     The credit information enterprise shall ensure that
the information utilised for credit information purposes shall,
as far as possible, be complete and that information shall not
be used which may give grounds for unjustified or an unreason­
ably negative attitude in respect of the person to whom the
information applies.

     Information, which at the end of a calendar year will         
be 5 years old or more* may only be utilised if it is abundantly
clear that such information continues to be of substantial
significance for the proper assessment of the person to whom
the information applies.

paragraph 16

     The enterprise may not as part of its credit information
service utilise

1.   information referring to race   or political or religious
     beliefs

2.   information on whether a person has been a suspect,
     indicted or convicted in a penal case

3. information referring to the state of health or abuse of intoxicants 

4. information concerning sexual life

5. other information concerning family affairs than those referring to family relationships or family status, property arrangements
between spouses and bread-winner status. 

However, the King may permit information, mentioned in sub-paragraphs 2 and 3 of the first paragraph, to be collected and notified
in certain cases. 

paragraph 17

No credit information may be provided when it is evident
from the facts of the case that the applicatn requesting such information lacks justification
for such a request. 

the King may, by regulation or in respect of the individual enterprise, issue rules
concerning the safeguarding against misue of information collected. 

paragraph 18

Credit information shall nomrally be notified in writing. It may be given verbally, provided it does not
contain any information which can be charged against the person to whom
the information applies, or if the credit information for practical reasons,
must be provided without delay. If credit information is given verbally,
the content of the information together wtih the applicant's name and address
shall be recorded and kept on file for at least 6 months. If it contains anything which can 
be charged against a person to whom the information applies, such information shall be 
confirmed in writing. 
  
Credit information may be supplied by circulation of publications or lists,
provided that the publication or list only contains information concerning
entrepreneurs, and that the information is given in summary form. Such publications
may only be sent to members and subscribers. 

Applications for credit information indicating that the
applicant shall be kept informed of any information which comes
to the knowledge of the credit information enterprises in
future or during a certain period of time, may only contain
information on entrepreneurs.

paragraph 19
     When credit information is provided or confirmed in
writing concerning someone who is not an entrepreneur, the
credit information enterprise shall send a copy or other
notification concerning the content free of charge to the
one about whom information has been requested. The enterprise
shall not be bound to disclose who has requested the informa­
tion or from whom it has received such information.

paragraph 20
      Everyone has a right to be informed of what information
the enterprise has stored about himself for use for
credit information purposes, and to be informed of what
 '"edit information has been provided about him during the
*ast 6 months.   Replies shall be given in writing unless the
person concerned has consented to its being given in another
manner.   If the information on what the register contains
is given in summary form or if the enterprise has stored
information which is not fully repeated, this shall be stated
in the reply. The person to whom the information applies
may request to examine all documents etc upon application to
the enterprise.
     The enterprise shall not be obliged to disclose who has
requested the information or from whom it has received such
information.
     The enterprise may charge a reasonable remuneration in
cases where information under the first paragraph is provided
in writing.
paragraph 21

     The King may prescribe by regulation that paragraph 14
concerning the government concession requirement, shall also
apply to other enterprises operating personal information
services.  In the concession permit, terms and conditions
may be prescribed for the collection, storage and use of such
information, as well as for supervision, for the right of the
person to which the information applies to be informed and for
the right to have his name deleted from the register.

Chapter 6 - Data processing enterprises 

paragraph 22

     Activities which consist in processing personal informa­
tion for third parties by means of electronic aids may not be
initiated before the King has given permission thereto.
Paragraph 14, second paragraph, shall apply correspondingly.



         The provisions in the first paragraph shall not apply
    if such processing takes place exclusively for other enter­
    prises within the same corporate group.

         The King nay issue supplementary regulations on what
    is to be considered as a data processing enterprise for the
    purpose of applying the provisions of the first paragraph*
    and may* by regulation or by individual decision make excep­
    tions to the individual provisions in this Chapter.

paragraph 23

         Enterprises which are required to obtain a government
    concessioft under paragraph 22, first paragraph, may not, save by
    agreement with the client, utilise the information for other
    purposes than those covered by the assignment. Nor may the
   information, save through such an agreement, be entrusted to
    anyone else for storage or processing purposes.

paragraph 24
         The enterprise shall adopt such security measures as
    are needed.

         The King may, by regulation or in respect of the
    individual enterprise, issue rules concerning the security-
    measures which shall be implemented.
    
Chapter 7 - Addressing and distribution services

paragraph 25
        Services which consist in selling or in other ways
    offer addresses of groups of people, or in executing assign­
    ments involving the dispatch of advertising and other noti­
    fications to such groups, may not be commenced before the
    King has given permission thereto. Paragraph 14, second paragraph,
    shall apply correspondingly.

         The King may issue supplementary regulations as to which
    enterprises shall be subject to the government concession
    requirement in pursuance of the first paragraph, and may, by
    regulation or by individual decision, make exceptions to the
    provisions in this Chapter.

paragraph 26

         A register utilised for such activities as mentioned
    in paragraph 25, first paragraph* may not contain

1.   information referring to race or political or religious
         beliefs

2.   Information on whether a person has been a suspect,
     indicted or convicted in a penal case

3.   information referring to the state of health or abuse
     of intoxicants

4.   information concerning sexual life

5.   other information concerning family affairs than those
     referring to family relationships or family status,
     property arrangements between spouses and bread-winner
     status.

     The King may, by regulation or by individual decision,
further restrict the right of the enterprise to register
personal information, and regulate the use of registered
information.                                                            
                                                                        
paragraph 27

     Notwithstanding the provisions in paragraph 26, the
enterprise may dispatch notifications based on customer and
membership registers which are placed at its disposal by the
client. Such registers may only be used fcr the dispatch of
notifications concerning the client's goods and services etc
and they may not be entrusted to others.                            

paragraph 28

     The enterprise shall in its registers delete the name
of anyone who so requests. Anyone so registered may demand
information on who is the enterprise's source in respect of
the registration.

     If the demand for deletion applies to such registers
as are mentioned in paragraph 27, such a demand shall be forwarded       
to the client, who shall be responsible for ensuring that the           
person concerned is deleted as addressee under any subsequent
use of the register. The person who has made such a demand,
shall be informed of the forwarding of the demand and the name
of the client.

paragraph 29

     The King may, by regulation or in respect of the indivi­
dual enterprise, lay down provisions with a view to preventing
personal information being used in violation of paragraphs 26 and
27 and to ensure the implementation of the rules in paragraph 28.


paragraph 30
     The King may prescribe by regulation

1.   that paragraphs 26 to 28 shall apply correspondingly in respect
     of enterprises which, in individual cases, undertake such
     assignments as are mentioned in paragraph 25* first paragraph,

2.   that certain types of information may not be utilised
     for the choice of addressees in the dispatch of notifica­
     tions on the enterprise's own goods and services etc,
     and that paragraph 28 shall apply correspondingly to such
     address lists.

Chapter 8 - Opinion polls and market investigations

paragraph 31
     
Services which consist in conducting opinion polls or
undertaking market investigations for third parties, may not
be commenced before the King has given permission thereto.
Paragraph 14, second paragraph, shall apply correspondingly.

      The King may issue supplementary regulations as to which
enterprises shall be subject to the government concession
requirement in pursuance of the first paragraph, and may,
by regulation or by individual decision, make exceptions to
the provisions in this Chapter.

     Personal information provided by someone conducting
opinion polls or undertaking market investigations may not be
disseminated further in such a way that the information can be
traced to an individual person.

     Information received for the purpose of opinion polls
and market investigations, may not be utilised for other
purposes.

paragraph 33

     Without the consent of the person to whom the informa­
tion applies, information concerning name, date of birth,
birth registration number, or the like, may not be entered
into a register which is processed by means of electronic
aids. Nor shall such information be entered into any other
register which is specially designed to make the information
easily accessible and capable of easy application.

     Without the consent of the person to whom the information
applies, the information collected shall not be stored for
more than 6 months in such a form that it can be traced to
an individual person.

paragraph 34

     The King may Issue specific regulations concerning such
services as are referred to in paragraph 31* The regulations
may inter alia contain provisions on the collection of information,
on the storage of information collected and other provisions to
ensure that personal information so collected is not utilised
wrongfully or falls into the wrong hands.

paragraph 35
     The King may prescribe by regulation that paragraphs 32 to
34 shall also apply to enterprises which, in individual cases,
undertake such assignments as mentioned in paragraph 31, first
paragraph, and to such enterprises which initiate such investiga­
tions for the benefit of its own administration and activities.

Chapter 9 - Transferal abroad etc

paragraph 36
     Registers governed by paragraph 9, first paragraph, must not
be transferred abroad without the permission of the King.

     Personal information collected in this realm, may not
be transferred abroad without the permission of the King, if
the purpose is to enter the information into a register as
referred to in paragraph 9? first paragraph.
     The King may, by regulation, make exceptions to the
first and second paragraphs.  It may be prescribed that these
provisions shall not apply in relation to certain other
countries.
paragraph 37
     The King may issue regulations concerning co-operation           
between the Data Surveillance Service and surveillance authori­
ties in other countries.  In such regulations special provi­
sions may be prescribed concerning notification requirements
in respect of registers and concerning supervision or
destruction of registers.

Chapter 10 - Penalties and compensation

paragraph 38
     Anyone who wilfully or negligently

1.   omits to obtain permission in accordance with paragraph 9,
     paragraph 13* third paragraph, paragraph 14, paragraph 22,
     paragraph 25, paragraph 31 or paragraph 36

2.   violates the rules or terms and conditions laid down in
     pursuance of paragraph 11, paragraph 14, paragraph 22,
     paragraph 25, paragraph 31 or paragraph J>6

3.   utilises information in violation of the rules in
     paragraph 16, paragraph 13, paragraph 23, paragraph 26,
     paragraph 27, paragraph 32 or paragraph 33

4.   omits to comply with requirements from the Data Surveillance
     Service in pursuance of paragraph 5 or paragraph 8

5.   omits to comply with requests for information in accordance
     with paragraph 7 or paragraph 20 or requests for deletion
     in accordance with paragraph 23

6.   omits to provide notification in accordance with
     paragraph 19 to the person to whom the information applies

shall be punished by fines or by imprisonment up to one year
or both.

     Aiding and abetting therein shall be punished in a
similar manner.

     In regulations issued in pursuance of this Act, it may
be prescribed that violations of such regulations shall be
punished by fines or by imprisonment up to one year or both.

paragraph 39

     If a violation, referred to in paragraph 33, is committed
by anyone acting on behalf of an enterprise, fines may be
imposed on the enterprise itself, even though no one is punishable
under the provisions of paragraph 33.

      When imposing sentence in pursuance of this section,
aue weight shall be given to the question whether the viola­
tion has been committed to promote the interests of the enter­
prise and whether the enterprise has derived any benefit from
the said violation.

     Paragraph 28 of the General Civil Penal Code shall not
apply to fines imposed in pursuance of this section.

paragraph 40

     If an enterprise, operating a service as referred to
in paragraph 13, has provided information in violation of the
provisions prescribed in, or Issued in pursuance of, this Act,
or has provided information which proves to be erroneous or
obviously misleading, the said enterprise shall compensate

any losses incurred by the person to whom the information applies.
This applies irrespective of whether anyone, acting on behalf
of or in the service of the enterprise, has been guilty of
negligence.

Chapter 11 - Relationship to other statutes. Entry into force. Transitional rules. 

paragraph 41

      The government concession requirement under paragraph 9»
cf. paragraph 10, shall not apply to personal data registers,
established by separate statute, in central or local government
institutions. Nevertheless rules, as referred to in paragraph 11,
shall be laid down for such registers as well, in so far as
 jther rules have not been prescribed in, or issued in pursuance
of, the enabling act. The other provisions in this Act shall         
also apply to such registers, in so far as other rules have
not been prescribed in, or issued in pursuance of, the
enabling act.

paragraph 42

     This Act shall enter into force on the date prescribed
by the King.

     As regards personal data registers, established prior
to the entry into force of the Act and which are governed by
paragraph 9, application for permission shall be submitted within
a time limit prescribed by the King. Provided that such applica­
tions have arrived within the time limit, personal data registers
may be utilised unchanged until rules have been prescribed
in pursuance of paragraph 11.

     The provisions in the second paragraph shall apply
correspondingly in cases where permission is required in             
accordance with Chapters 5 to 9*

paragraph 43

     As from the date of entry into force of this Act the
following amendments shall be made to other statutes:

1.   Act no 1 of 24 May 1961 relating to Savings Banks

          New second paragraph of paragraph 21 shall read:

"This provision shall however not prevent the bank from
operating credit information services in accordance with the
legislation applicable to such services.,,


2.   Act no 2 of 2k May 1961 relating to Commercial Banks

              New second paragraph of paragraph 18 shall read:

    "This provision shall however not prevent the bank from
    operating credit information services in accordance with
    the legislation applicable to such services."

3.   Act no 71 of 11 June 1976 relating to financing services

              New second paragraph of paragraph 15 shall read:

    "This provision shall however not prevent the enterprise from
    operating credit information services in accordance with the
    legislation applicable to such services."