Slovenia
Law on Personal Data Security

1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 1

This Law regulates the security of personal data contained     in
data files and their protection; records needed for personal data
security and their protection; as well as    individual's rights
including the protection of the latter, and certain restrictions
related to it; transfer of personal data beyond state border,
and supervision of the fulfilment of the provisions as stated.
Art. 2

Personal- data security includes rights, principles and meas­
ures   designed   to prevent any illegal and   unjustified     en­
croachment upon human personality; his/her personal and     family
life on the grounds of gathering, ’ processing,     storage    and
transfer of personal data and their use. Personal-data protec­
tion includes legal, organisational and appropriate     logically
technical procedures and measures, aimed at eliminating the
possibility of unauthorised or      unregistered access to the
premises; hard - and soft - ware; random or intentional unautho­
rised data destruction, modification or loss; as well as     unau­
thorised access,     processing and transfer of these data, and
their exploitation.

Art. 3

Data   files   with personal data may be established, kept and
maintained solely    on a legal basis or personal consent of
individuals to whom these data refer.

Art. 4

Foreign      citizens have on terms of reciprocity the same   rights 
ensuing        from    data    security,    as    the active ones.
Art.5                                                     

The      terms   as used in this Law have the following       meaning:
1.   personal data any piece of data with reference               to   the
properties, condition or relationships of individuals,             regard­
less of its form;

2.  individual any person in physical terms that is or             may be
determined, and to whom a piece of data     is applied               (data
subject);


                                     1
3.  data file - file containing - in whole or part - personal
data (e.g.register, data base), kept by some    automated data-
processing   means   (or classical means) for file-keeper's (or
other user's) purposes, i.e. tasks insuring form his field of
activity as defined;

4. file-keeper is a subject authorised (through law or    written
consent of the individual(s) concerned) to establish, keep and
maintain as well as supervise data files containing personal
data;  and for this very purpose to gather, process,   store and
transfer personal data as contained, and to use them;
5.  user of data (data or file user) - is a subject different
from file-keeper himself, authorised (through law or individual
written consent) to use personal data.

2.   PERSONAL DATA SECURITY

Art. 6
The file-keeper may, authorised through law or written    consent
of the    individual(s) concerned, gather, process,    store and
transfer   personal data. The file-keeper may entrust another
legal or physical     subject related to data-gathering, proc­
essing,  storage and    transfer. The legal or physical subject
as defined in the previous   paragraph, may only take over serv­
ices covering the needs of gathering, processing,    storage and
transfer of personal data - within customer specifications - -
and may not himself use these data for any       other   purpose.
Mutual rights and obligations are to be defined contractual­
ly - in written form - and should also include conditions and
measures designed for personal-data security and protection.

Art. 7
Personal data      are gathered directly from the individual to
whom   these refer. There are cases - legally determined - when
personal data may also be gathered from other persons or exist­
ing files.    The law has to specify persons or files - as stated
in the     previous paragraph - from which personal data or whole
files   may previous paragraph - from which personal data or
whole   files may be acquired.• If there is no exception to the
law, the individual to whom      data refer should in advance be
informed of the fact that data referring to him will be ac­
quired        from    -  an       existent        data      file.

Art.8                                                           

Personal data    may   be gathered, processed and transferred
solely for legally specified purposes, or purposes ensuing form
individual(s)  consent; in no way should they be used in a way
not compatible with the purposes. The provision mentioned above
also applies to any cases of combining personal data acquired
from diverse data files.


                                2
Art. 9

 Personal data may only be stored and used for as long as there
 exists the need (purpose)   for it - because of which data have
 been gathered,    processed and stored. Once this purpose (as
 stated above)   is fulfilled, personal    data are erased from
 file,   unless   the law specifies   otherwise   (e.g.  natural
 and   cultural   heritage).



 Art.10

The file-keeper may transfer personal data to other users oniy
when the latter are legally authorised to use them, or        upon
written demand or consent of the individual(s) to whom       these
data refer. Users from the previous paragraph of this Article
may not - themselves - transfer personal data thus acquired to
other    persons; they may use them solely for purposes specified
by    and conforming with this Law.  In cases when users want to
get      access     to   personal   data     for      statistical,
scientific&research, educational or other similar purposes, the
former may be granted access to data required, without - for
that matter - any identification of individuals concerned.     The
file-keeper should keep records of each instance of      personal-
data transfer (ensuing from paragraphs one and three), in order
to be able to provide evidence - at whatever later stage, when
necessary - as to which personal    data have been given, to whom
and for what purpose.

3. PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA

Art.11           

Personal-data protection includes legal,     organisational   and
appropriate logically-technical procedures and measures     aimed
at:
- protecting the premises, hard - and system soft-ware;
- protecting application SW used in personal-data     processing;
- ensuring safe^transfer of personal data;
- denying unauthorised access to equipment used for       person­
al-data processing, and files themselves;
- providing the possibility of finding out when certain      data
were used or entered into the file(s); by whom and at what
period of data storage.                -

Art.12
Procedures   and measures as described in the      preview para­
graph, are determined in their internal acts by file-keepers and
other   subjects involved - conforming with this     Law   -  in
data-gathering,     processing,    storage,    transfer      and
usage.


4.DATA CATALOGUES AND CATALOGUE OF FILES

Art.13
The file-keeper is to keep all files clearly classified in.    the
data catalogue - observing the law - with respect to:

1. the name of the file,
2. the file-keeper and his headquarters,
3.  the legal basis of tile establishment,
4.  the categories     of individuals to whom personal data -
kept in the file(s)     - refer,
5. the kinds of personal data kept in the file,
6.   the legal basis of personal data-gathering,
7. the mode of personal data-gathering,
8.  the purpose of data-gathering, processing and         storage;
personal data use; and legal basis of purpose of use,
9. the time limits of personal data use and storage,
10. the    restriction of individuals' rights applying    to data
in the    file(s), and the legal basis of restrictions,
11. the users of personal data contained in the files,
12. the fact whether personal data are carried (transmitted)
abroad,  and    -  in such a case - to       which state, to whom
and on what lawful basis.               

Art.14

Data   stated    under preview paragraph are made accessible by
the file-keeper to the republican administrate organ - legal­
ly authorised to hold a catalogue of files (the common      cata­
logue of files), in 15 days'term prior to the establishment of
data file, or any entry of personal data not yet contained.
The file-keeper will keep the republican organ (under     preview
paragraph)  informed of any data change (under preview Art.),
in 5'days' term after it has occurred.       The republic organ
from the first paragraph will publish a        catalogue of data
files, observing the mode and periods - as well as the methodolo­
gy - prescribed by      the   law.

5.   INDIVIDUAL'S RIGHTS

Art.15     The republican administrative organ competent for keep­
ing    the    catalogue   of files, is obliged to allow access
to/insight into the catalogue, and to have his/her own copy
of   data contained.
                                                        
Art.16             

The file-keeper is obliged - upon demand of the individual
concerned:
1.  to allow insight to any individual, into data in the file
referring to him/her, as well as to get a copy of them;
2.  to let any individual have his/her own copy from data file
referring to him/her;                        
3. let any individual have, conforming with       paragraph 4 of
Art. 10 of this Law, a list of subjects to whom data          refer­
ring him/herself were given at a certain period.          The file-
keeper is obliged to allow insight and to have a       copy of data
to any individual - in conform, with point 1 of preview para­
graph - immediately, or in seven days' delay     after having re­
ceived   his/her demand (or let him know, in    the     same delay,
the reasons for which he/she will have to be denied         data in
sight and copy). Data copy under point 2, and list under point 3
- first    paragraph - have to be transmitted to the individual
concerned in 15 days' delay after having received his/her demand
(or he/she has to be informed, in the same delay, of the reasons
for which he/she will have to be denied data copy or list). The
copy as mentioned under point 2 of paragraph 1, may       solely be
used for the purpose of personal data-security      implementation
(which has to be noted on the copy). The cost arising from
individual demand is covered by the file-keeper, while the cost
of data copy and list by the applicant himself.

Art.17

The file-keeper is obliged - upon individual demand:
1.   to    complete or correct data proved - by the individual
concerned - to be incomplete, incorrect or not updated;
2. to      erase any data found - by the individual concerned -
to be gathered nonconforming with the provisions of          this
Law.    In case the file-keeper has been informed of the personal
data in question as incomplete, incorrect or not up to date,
he    is obliged - without delay - to make whatever correction
or completion necessary, and to let the individual know of it.
Any     completion, correction or erasure of data (under first
paragraph) has to      be performed by the file-keeper without
delay (or the individual concerned has to be informed, in 15
days' delay, of the reasons for which the file-keeper will
make no data change or completion). The file-keeper has -
without delay - to inform the users of      (original)   personal
data of any completion, correction or erasure made. All com­
pletion/correction/erasure of data eventually made      does not
exempt the file-keeper from possible      penal and      material
responsibility.                                               '

6.INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS   PROTECTION


Art.18 Any individual finding his rights to be violated may -
conforming  with this Law - demand legal protection.    Application may be put in at any time during the violation(s).   

Art.19

Any application put in, stating violation of Art.17    of this
Law, may contain the demand that the court - before arbitration
access to the data in dispute.    

Art.20
The application case is not one of a lawsuit (hence            the proceed­
ings to follow).

Art.21
                   
The court procedure itself is an urgent one.

Art.22
The       public   is   excluded      from   the       proceedings.

Art.23
Given the circumstances of the case, the court may decide on
the application made without seeking statement of the opposite
party, if there is sufficient evidence contained in the applica­
tion .

 Art.24
In   case - damage has been caused to an individual, due to
misuse of data referring to him/her - according to the provi­
sions of this Law he/she may place a claim for it.

7. RESTRICTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS

Art.25
The rights of individuals - relative to personal data security
may   only exceptionally be restricted, in legally     prescribed
cases, and in scope necessary for a specific purpose because of
which restriction has been introduced.      Irrespective of the
preview paragraph, no restriction whatsoever can be imposed on
the right to data file insight, as well as the right to put in
an application to claim legal protection.

8. CARRYING PERSONAL      DATA     ABROAD

Art.26 The file-keeper may allow personal data to be carried
(transferred)    abroad,   and transmitted to foreign users on
condition that the state-recipience has - guaranteed - full
protection of personal data,       including   foreign    citizens.
Relevant official     certificates are issued by the republican
administrate organ competent for international         cooperation/
The   condition    from preview paragraph     fulfilled^ personal
data may be transmitted to foreign users on the basis of inter­
national contracts and agreements, as well      a agreements     on
scientific, business, technical, cultural       o similar coopera­
tion.   Irrespective of paragraph 1 and 2, personal data     trans­
mission    across state border, to foreign users,       is allowed
solely with written consent of the individual      concerned. Any
personal data transmission across state border is   register in
accordance with the provisions of Art. 13 and 14 of this Law

Art.27

Irrespective   of the provisions under Art. 26 of    this  Law,
carrying out and transmission of personal data to foreign users
are    not allowed in cases specified by        the   Law.

Art.28

The file-keeper may transmit to federal organs and organi­
sations - as well as users in the other republics -        those
personal data only which are determined by federal law or inter
agreement, with due protection of these   data under federal or
republican law.    Irrespective of the provision    from preview
paragraph,   personal data may only be transmitted to federal
organs and organisations - as well as users in the other repub­
lics - with written consent of each individual concerned.

Art.29

Any individual finding the transmission of data         referring
him/herself, to either foreign users or federal organs and
organisations (as well as users in the other republics), as
harmful to his rights, may put in an application (claim9 ensuing
from Art. 18 of this Law.

9. INSPECTION

Art.30

Inspection over the implementation of the provisions           of this
Law is performed by the republican organ competent for              the
social system of information. The republican organ (from preview
paragraph)   is in charge of: - the lawfulness of gathering,
processing, storage,        transmission and use of personal data,    
the implementation of procedures and measures aimed at             per­
sonal    data     security (as specified by intern. acts            of
subjects from Art. 12 of this Law), - the implementation of the
provisions     of     this    Law with        respect     to  data/file.
catalogue(s) ,     as the registration of          the transmission of
data to users,       - the implementation of the provisions of this
Law,  relative        to    the carrying out of data across state
border and .their        transmission to foreign., users.

Art.31                                                                 
In the course of his inspection, the republican inspector in
authority is entitled to: - examine the documentation       refer-
ring to the gathering,       processing, storage, transmission and
use of    personal     data,       as well as their carrying out
across   state border and       transmission to foreign users, -
examine the contents of data/file catalogue(s),     - examine the
documentation and the acts regulating personal        data protec­
tion,  - to inspect the premises       where data are gathered,
processed, transferred and used (includingcomputer and        other
equipment),  -to verify the protective       measures    and their
implementation.     The republican inspector himself is obliged to
keep personal        data,  learnt in the    course      of     his
duty,    as     official    secret.

Art.32

The republican inspector is entitled to - by written order: '
1. set a term within which all irregularities as stated have     to
be eliminated,                     '
2.   interdict further gathering, processing,     storage transmis­
sion and use      of personal data, to subjects mentioned
under Art.    12 of this Law -        who have   not secured full
respect of the measures and procedures aimed      at personal data
protection, 3. interdict    (further) carrying out/transmission of
personal      data across the border to foreign users (in disac­
cord      with the provide of this law). any complaint against
the above order - as issued - under point 2 and p. 3 of the
first paragraph, will • not withhold       its execution.

10.   LAW   EXECUTION   AND   SANCTIONS   
Art.34

Fines from 20.000,00 to 50.000,00 YUD will be imposed           on the
keeper in case of violation(s):
1.   if he is found to be in the possession of a data file -
without     legal   justification    or written consent        of    the
individual to whom personal data refer (Art.3);
2.    when gathering, processing,       storing     and    transmitting
personal     data without legal justification- or written consent
of the individual concerned (first paragraph of Art. 6);
3.    when    separate operations related       to    personal     data-
gathering , processing,   storage and     transmission       have been
transferred     to another legal or physical          subject without
prior agreement conform, with paragraph 3 of Art.6 of this Law;
4. when gathering7acquiring personal data from other persons or
existent data files contrarily to the law - or with out prior
consent of the individual concerned (Art. 7); *
5.    when    gathering,  processing,    storing     or    transmitting
personal data for purposes not allowed by the law, or           written
consent of the individual concerned; or when            using personal
data    in ways not compatible with the            purposes    as    de­
scribed (Art.   8); 6. when not erasing personal data after having"
achieved the          purpose of data-gathering, processing and
storage     (Art 9);
7.    when transmitting personal data      to    unauthorised      users
first paragraph of Art. 10), or when transmitting data                to
them    in    a personal - identifying form (third       paragraph    of
Art. 10), or when transmitting data without later           possibility
of verification (to whom, for what        purpose... fourth paragraph
of Art.     10);                                        .            .
8.    when    failing    to secure     file    with    data     legally
specified(Art.13), or to provide data necessary to           data . file
catalogue    (Art. 14); 9. when in violation of the        individual's
rights     (Art.  16 and     17 of this    law),    or    fallingshort
ofthe obligations         ensuing from the      above-mentioned arti­
cles; 10. when carrying personal data across the state border in
breach of the provisions of Art. 26 and 27 of this Law. Fines
from 1000,00 to 5000,00         will be imposed on the      person re­
sponsible of the file-keeper in case of           violation(s)    stated
under    preview    paragraph.

Art.35                                                             

Fines from 20.000,00 to 50.000,00         will be imposed on the
user    of data when re-transmitting personal data to          other
persons,    or when using them for purposes not conforming with
this Law (second paragraph of Art. 10).     If the data-user is an
individual,     he will be - in case of violation as       described
under    preview    paragraph  -    fined    from    1.0,00,00    to
5.000. 00    .The personal responsible of the legal subject will
be fined     1.000.00 to 5.000,00 when found in violation as
described under first paragraph                          

Art.3 6

Legal orphysical subject found in abuse of its authority -   as
contained    in   the agreement under paragraph 3 of Art. 6 of
this Law - will be fined        20.000,00 to 50.000,00   .  The
personal    responsible    of the legal subject will be fined
1.000. 00 to 5.000,00    .when found in violation as described
under preview     paragraph.

Art.37                                                             

The    file-keeper     or   another   subject    will     be     fined
20.000. 00    to    50.000    when found      to    be     gathering,
processing,storing,     transmitting or using personal data accord­
ing to this Law,      without prior determination of procedures and
measures aimed at personal data protection - in his intern acts
(Art.12).    The    personal responsible of the       file-copperware
another subject - found in violation as described under preview
paragraph ill      be     fined     1.000,00     to 5.000,00.          
Art.38                                                -
The personal responsible of the republican administrate organ,'
competent for data-file catalogue-keeping, will be    fined
1.000. 00 to 5.000,00 when found in violation of the individual's
rights   to have insight into data-file catalogue, or to    have
copy of data contained in there   (Art.  15).




                                   
12.TEMPORARY AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Art.39

File-keepers and other subjects as described under Art.    12   of
his   Law, determine the procedures and measures to        use at
personal-data protection, in their intern, acts in six      months
delay from the enactment of this Law.

Art.40

File-keepers have to make clear - from data catalogues data for
each file, as specified under Art. 13 of this Law, simultane­
ously with catalogue establishment.

Art.41

The establishment and keeping of existent data files for.      the
purposes of gathering, processing, storage, transmission and use
of personal data contained - are to conform with    provisions
of this Law in one year's delay from its         enactment.

Art.4 2

The Law is enacted the eighth day after its   publication in       the
Official Journal of Republic Sloven.